CHILE.  An explosion from a single stick of dynamite went off on the patio of the Santiago Binational Center, causing $21,000 in damages.
ISRAEL.  Palestinian terrorists fired five mortar shells into the collective settlement at Masada, causing slight damage but no injuries.
GUATEMALA.  A bomb was thrown over the wall surrounding the U.S. Marines guards house in Guatemala City, causing damage but no injuries.
FRANCE.  Five French students bombed the Paris offices of   Chase Manhattan Bank before dawn.  Trans-World Airways and the Bank of America were also bombed.   They claimed to be protesting the U.S. involvement in the Vietnam war.
UNITED STATES - Unidentified anti-Castro Cubans attempted to bomb the Miami branch of the Spanish National Tourist Office.
UNITED STATES.  The Mexican mission to the United States was bombed by El Poder Cubano.
URUGUAY.  An unexploded Molotov cocktail was found on the steps of the Binational Center building in Montevideo.
UNITED STATES.  The Mexican consul general's residence in Miami was damaged by a bomb placed by El Poder Cubano.
BAHAMAS.  Haitian Consul Joseph Antoine Dorce was assassinated by four Haitian exiles, members of the Haitian Coalition, a New York-based anti-Duvalier organization.
UNITED STATES.  The Australian National Tourist Office in New York City was bombed by El Poder Cubano.
UNITED STATES.  El Poder Cubano terrorists bombed the Mexican National Tourist Office in Chicago.
UNITED STATES.  Police dismantled a bomb placed by El Poder Cubano at the offices of Aeronaves de Mexico, the Mexican national airline. Another bomb in the Mexican Consulate was also defused.
UNITED STATES.  An Air France ticket office in Los Angeles was damaged by a bomb placed by El Poder Cubano.
ITALY.  An El Al Israel Airlines plane flying from Rome to Tel Aviv with 10 crew members and 38 passengers was hijacked and diverted to Algeria.  Three armed members of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) calling themselves the PFLP General Command were the perpetrators.  The plane landed in Algiers. The Algerian government released 19 non-Israeli passengers, who were flown to Paris the next day.  Ten Israelis were released and flown to Geneva before going on to Tel Aviv.  The  Algerian government continued to hold the plane with seven crew members and five Israeli male passengers.    The PFLP officials said that they had asked the International Red Cross to supervise the exchange of the Israeli crew and passengers in Algiers for captured Palestinian guerrillas in prison in Israel.  The Israeli government denounced the hijacking as airborne piracy, and asked the Algerian authorities to release the plane and the Israeli passengers and crew.
ISRAEL.  Palestinian terrorists fired three bazooka shells into the town of Ein Yahav, shattering an empty infirmary but injuring no one.
ISRAEL.  Al Fatah exploded three grenades in Jerusalem's Jewish section, injuring eight Israelis and two Americans.
UNITED STATES.  Croatian terrorists planted a bomb aboard the Kupres, a Yugoslav ship.  The bomb was located and disarmed after a tip from the FBI.
UNITED STATES.  El Poder Cubano terrorists fired upon the Polish vessel Polancia in a Miami harbor.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC. An explosive device was dismantled in front of the USIS building.
BOLIVIA.  A bomb went off on the ground floor of the entrance to the USIS building in La Paz.
ARGENTINA.  A bomb exploded inside the USIS library in Buenos Aires, blowing out plate glass windows and damaging the interior.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  Three prominent anti-Communist Croatian emigre leaders were found murdered in a Munich apartment.
FRANCE.  Two Italians hijacked an Olympic Airways jet en route from Paris to Athens to publicize opposition to the military junta in Greece.  The two brandished a pistol and a grenade.  They gave the 130 passengers handbills telling them that you have just been punished for going to Greece.  Athens headquarters of Olympic Airways promised to prosecute ruthlessly the hijackers.
GREECE.  An Israeli passenger was killed and a stewardess was wounded in a gunfire attack on an El Al Israel Airlines plane at the Athens airport. In retaliation, Israeli commandos attacked Beirut Airport on December 28, 1968, destroying or damaging 13 airplanes.  Two Palestinians who were sentenced to 17 and 14 years imprisonment for the Athens incident were freed after the hijacking of a Greek airliner to Cairo on July 22, 1970.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  Arsonists set fire to the Amerika Haus Library in Frankfurt.  Damage estimated at $5,000.
ISRAEL.  A bomb killed two and wounded eight in a central Jerusalem supermarket.
AUSTRALIA.  A Molotov cocktail was thrown from a passing car at the U.S. consulate general building in Melbourne.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  A Molotov cocktail was thrown through a ground floor window of the Munich Amerika Haus, causing little damage.
JORDAN.  The Trans-Arabian Pipeline in Jordan was sabotaged.  An explosive device caused a fire which blocked the flow of oil.  A spokesman of the PFLP claimed that his group had intended to pollute water supplied to Israeli settlements and fisheries in Hutch Valley.  Oil was reported to be seeping into the northern part of the Sea of Galilee, and oil slicks were seen on the Jordan River.  The Israelis managed to contain the blaze after 14 hours.
GREECE.  A bomb wrecked the ticket booth of a theater outside the entrance to the Tameion building which houses USIS facilities in Athens.
PAKISTAN.  Three armed members of the Eritrean Liberation Front (ELF) attacked an Ethiopian airliner at the Karachi airport.  Part of the Boeing 707 burned.  No casualties were reported.  The terrorists, all of whom were captured, told authorities that they carried out the attack to dramatize their opposition to Ethiopian rule in Eritrea.  The three were convicted and sentenced to one year of hard labor.On July 31, the ELF issued a communique warning travelers that they would risk their lives if they flew on Ethiopian Airlines.  The communique said that the ELF would resort to attacks on Ethiopian airliners in retaliation for Ethiopian Air Force attacks on Eritrean villages.
ISRAEL.  A fire caused by a PFLP bomb burned four hours at an oil pipeline in Haifa.
UNITED KINGDOM.  Terrorists fire-bombed a London department store known to have links with Israel.  The PFLP later claimed responsibility and warned that there would be more bomb attacks on Jewish-owned establishments in London and in the United States.  PFLP leader George Habbash said, We shall expand our operations everywhere, in all parts of the world.  The enemy camp includes not only Israel but also the Zionist movement, world imperialism led by the United States, and reactionary powers bound to imperialism.
YUGOSLAVIA.  Arson occurred in the Belgrade office of the U.S. Binational Commission Cultural Exchange during the night.
INDIA.  An explosion at the Calcutta Post Office was directed at the USIS library.
EGYPT.  An Egyptian Misrair Anatov-24 flying from Cairo to Aswan was hijacked to an airstrip north of Jidda, Saudi Arabia by six hijackers.
BRAZIL.  Members of theRevolutionary Movement of the 8th (MR-8) and ALN (Action for National Liberation) kidnapped Charles Burke Elbrick, U.S. ambassador to Brazil, in Rio de Janeiro.  The kidnappers took Elbrick from his car and left a ransom note demanding the release of 15 prisoners who were to be flown to Algeria, Chile, or Mexico, and the publication of an antigovernment manifesto.  The kidnappers negotiated with the government by notes.On September 5, the government agreed to release the prisoners and authorized Brazilian newspapers to publish the manifesto.  The deal was almost upset at the final moment when paratroopers in Rio de Janeiro attempted to prevent the plane carrying the prisoners from taking off.  The paratroopers were ordered back to their barracks, however, and the plane left for Mexico on September 6.  Ambassador Elbrick was released on September 7.Following the episode, Brazilian authorities initiated a roundup of leftist suspects, arresting as many as 4,000.  This was the first of the diplomatic kidnappings, a practice that spread rapidly throughout Latin America in the next few years.
BELGIUM.  Three Arabs recruited by Al Fatah, two of them teenage boys, threw hand grenades at the El Al Airlines office in Brussels.  Four people were injured by flying glass. On Sept. 9, 1969 the PFLP claimed credit for the three coordinated attacks (Brussels, Bonn & The Hague).
ETHIOPIA.  Three armed members of the Eritrean Liberation Front (ELF) hijacked an Ethiopian Airlines DC-6 with 66 passengers aboard.  The flight, bound for Djibouti from Addis Ababa, was forced to land at Aden, Southern Yemen.  One of the hijackers, Mohammed Sayed, 18, was shot by an Ethiopian secret police official who had been a passenger on the flight.  Police captured the other two hijackers.
CANADA.  A firebomb was thrown against the door of the U.S. consulate general in Vancouver.
ARGENTINA.  Bombs damaged offices of IBM Corporation and General Electric Company in San Miguel de Tucuman.There were four more bombings in Cordoba against American businesses the same day.
ARGENTINA.  A branch of the Bank of Boston in Buenos Aires was bombed.
BOLIVIA.  A bomb exploded in front of the La Paz headquarters of the U.S. Peace Corps.
ARGENTINA.  Offices of 15 foreign firms--nine U.S.-owned--were bombed.  The FAP (Peronist Armed Forces) claimed responsibility.
ARGENTINA.  Offices of 15 foreign firms--nine U.S.-owned--were bombed.  The FAP (Peronist Armed Forces) claimed responsibility.
ARGENTINA.  Offices of 15 foreign firms--nine U.S.-owned--were bombed.  The FAP (Peronist Armed Forces) claimed responsibility.
ARGENTINA.  Offices of 15 foreign firms--nine U.S.-owned--were bombed.  The FAP (Peronist Armed Forces) claimed responsibility.
AUSTRALIA.  Croatian extremists bombed the Yugoslav embassy in Canberra.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  A bomb exploded outside a U.S. officer's club, causing slight damage.
PHILIPPINES.  Philippine nationalists attempted to assassinate U.S. Vice President Spiro T. Agnew by throwing a bomb at his car.  There was no damage.
GREECE.  An unexploded bomb was discovered in the men's room of the U.S. consular section of the embassy in Athens.
PHILIPPINES.  A car bomb exploded behind the Joint U.S. Military Assistance Group headquarters in Manila.  Three people were injured and the Message Center of the building was damaged.
SWITZERLAND.  A sabotaged Swissair plane en route to Tel Aviv crashed on takeoff, killing all 47 passengers, 15 of whom were Israelis.  The PFLP-GC claimed responsibility, and then upon public revulsion of the attack, disclaimed it.
PHILIPPINES.  Two hours after a violent anti-American demonstration, a bomb rocked the embassy area and slightly damaged a passing tanker truck carrying gasoline.  Another bomb was also found in the embassy area.
GREECE.  A United Arab Airlines Antonov 24 flying from Athens to Cairo via Alexandria was four minutes out of its stopover when a bomb exploded in the landing gear well of the rear of the left engine, causing extensive damage to the undercarriage and injuring two of the ten passengers.  The plane landed safely.
ARGENTINA.  Members of the FAL kidnapped Joaquin Waldemar Sanchez, the Paraguayan consul in the border town of Ituzaingo.  They threatened to kill Sanchez and begin killing the managers of American business firms if two of their members being held by the Argentine government were not released from prison.The government rejected their demand, stating that one of the two was not in custody and that the other would stay in jail because he was a common criminal who was in the hands of the judicial branch of the government and it would violate the Argentine constitution for the executive branch to interfere in the judicial branch.  President Stroessner of Paraguay, who was vacationing in Argentina at the time, fully concurred in the government's position.The kidnappers extended their deadline several times.  The government displayed one of the prisoners on television to show that he had not been tortured or killed, but refused to release him.  On March 28, the kidnappers released Sanchez unharmed, for humanitarian reasons, but vowed to execute police and government officials.  Argentina thus became the first government to successfully defy a group of kidnappers, establishing a precedent which Guatemala would follow a few days later on March 3l.
ARGENTINA.  Four members of MANO attempted to kidnap Yuri Pivovarov, Soviet assistant commercial attache.  Pivovarov was taken from his car at gunpoint and forced into another car.  His wife's screams alerted a police guard who fired at the fleeing car.  A passing police car took up the chase, riddling the kidnappers' car with bullets.  When the kidnappers' car collided with another car and smashed into a tree, three of the kidnappers were captured and the fourth escaped. Pivovarov was not seriously injured.  A subsequent investigation revealed that a deputy federal police inspector was involved in the attempt.  MANO had threatened to kill the Soviet Ambassador and his family just two days before in retaliation for the kidnapping of the Paraguayan consul on 24 March.
GUATEMALA.  Members of the FAR kidnapped Count Karl von Spreti, West German ambassador to Guatemala, who was taken from his car at gunpoint and driven to a hideout outside of Guatemala City.  The kidnappers threatened to execute Count von Spreti unless the government released 17 prisoners.  The demand was later increased to the release of 25 prisoners and the payment of $700,000 ransom.In the face of strong pressure from the West German government, and in contrast to its previous prompt accessions to kidnappers' demands (March 6, 1970), the Guatemalan government rejected the demands, citing the Argentine precedent (March 24, 1970) and the Guatemalan constitution which prevented the executive branch from interfering with the judicial branch of the government.Behind the public show of resistance was a private conviction on the part of officials within the Guatemalan government, including the president, that the kidnappers' deadline had been extended and that a compromise settlement was possible.  A last-minute attempt at negotiations failed, however, and on April 5 authorities received an anonymous phone call telling them where to find the ambassador's body. The West German government denounced the Guatemalan government and reduced its diplomatic representation in Guatemala to a bare minimum.
JORDAN.  Fedayeen terrorists carried out a successful assault on the U.S.  embassy in Amman.  Damage was estimated to be approximately $100,000.
TURKEY.  A bomb exploded in the El Al Israel Airlines office in Istanbul.  There were no injuries.
ITALY.  A policeman defused six sticks of dynamite that he found near the U.S. consulate entrance.
VENEZUELA.  A bomb did minor damage to an American business in Caracas.
SWITZERLAND.  A bomb exploded in the baggage compartment of an Iberian Air Lines DC9 in Geneva.  A caller had given a warning first and all passengers and crew had been removed from the plane.
ECUADOR.  A bomb exploded in front of the home of the U.S. branch public affairs officer in Guayaquil.  A telephone call claimed the blast in retaliation for U.S. entry into Cambodia.However, no group claimed responsibility.
PHILIPPINES.  A bomb was found in the USIS Thomas Jefferson Cultural Center in Manila.  It was defused; however, another bomb did explode in the music library of the center, injuring no one but damaging the building.
IRAN.  The Tehran offices of El Al were bombed.
THAILAND.  Three USIS foreign service local employees were killed in an ambush by communist terrorists while traveling in a USIS vehicle on the main highway in Chiang Mai.
UNITED STATES.  Members of Revolutionary Force Seven claimed credit for the early morning firebombing of the Argentine Embassy.
UNITED STATES.  The New York City office of BOAC was bombed to protest British actions in Northern Ireland.
UNITED STATES.  An explosive device was found at the South African Consulate in New York.
BOLIVIA.  Members of the ELN kidnapped two West German technicians in Teoponte.  They burned the offices of the U.S.-owned goldmining firm, South American Placers, Inc., stole $5,000, and fled into the jungle with their captives, whom they threatened to execute unless the Bolivian government released 10 prisoners within 48 hours.  The government yielded on July 22 and the two technicians were released unharmed on July 23.
URUGUAY.  Aloisio Mares Gomide, Brazilian consul, was kidnapped by Tupamaros the same day as Mitrione (see July 31 above).  The Tupamaros said they chose Dias Gomide because he was the representative of a dictatorship which had tortured and killed hundreds of Brazilian patriots.  Dias Gomide and two other hostages were being held in return for the release of some 150 imprisoned Tupamaros, but the Tupamaros later reduced their ransom demand for Dias Gomide to $250,000.  The ransom money was raised by the consul's wife, but some reports indicate that it was never paid.  Dias Gomide was finally released over six months later on February 21, 1971.
UNITED STATES.  A Pan American World Airways 747 jumbo jet was hijacked to Cuba by a 35-year-old Puerto Rican nationalist, Rudolfo Rivera Rios.  When the plane, going from New York to San Juan, P.R., with 376 persons aboard was about 300 miles from its destination, the hijacker brandished a revolver, held up a bottle that he said contained nitroglycerine, and demanded that the plane change course for Havana.  When the aircraft landed, the Cuban authorities jailed the hijacker for seven years.  When Rios returned to the United States in 1978, he pleaded guilty to one count of kidnapping.  He claimed that he had hijacked the plane to dramatize the cause of Puerto Rican independence.  He was sentenced to life in prison and will be eligible for release in ten years.
ARGENTINA.  The FAP conducted an armed attack on the Italian Hospital in Santa Fe.
BOLIVIA.  Bombs exploded at the La Paz residence of a U.S. Embassy officer and at the U.S. Consulate building.
NETHERLANDS.  Thirty-two armed Amboinese youths seized the Hague residence of the Indonesian ambassador, killing a guard in the attack.  They held the family hostage, demanding the independence of the South Moluccan Islands. They were talked into surrendering the next day.
GREECE.  Extensive damage resulted when a bomb exploded in the parking lot of the U.S. embassy in Athens when two terrorists were attempting to carry it into the building.  Both terrorists were killed.
SWITZERLAND.  In a well-coordinated plan, members of the PFLP hijacked three airliners bound for New York from Europe, and diverted them to various locations in the Middle East. A Swissair DC-8 enroute from Zurich was hijacked to Dawson Field in Jordan.   A Pan American World Airways 747 from Amsterdam was first ordered flown to Beirut, then to Cairo, where it was blown up a few minutes after the passengers and crew were evacuated.   A TWA 707 en route from Frankfurt was forced to Dawson Field, a landing strip in the Jordanian desert described by the hijackers as the Revolution Airport.A fourth hijacking of an El Al Israel Airlines plane en route to London from Amsterdam was foiled when a security guard aboard the plane killed one of the hijackers and wounded another.  The dead hijacker was Patrick Arguello, a member of the FSLN, a leftist guerrilla movement in Nicaragua.  The wounded hijacker was Leila Khaled, who had participated in the hijacking of a TWA 707 to Syria on August 29, 1969.  Miss Khaled was arrested in London but later released to gain release of the hostages in Jordan.The PFLP announced that the hijackings were in retaliation for American support of Israel and the U.S.  peace initiatives in the Middle East.  The hijackers demanded the release of Arab guerrillas imprisoned in Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and West Germany.  West Germany at first agreed to release the prisoners, but later reversed its position in favor of a joint international effort to free the passengers.On September 9, the PFLP hijacked a BOAC VC-10 from Bombay, India and also had it flown to Dawson Field in Jordan, bringing the total number of hostages held in the desert to 300.  Negotiations to free them were complicated by the outbreak of fighting between Jordanian troops and Palestinian guerrillas.  On September 12, the remaining passengers (women and children had been removed earlier) were evacuated and the three planes were blown up.  Most of the passengers were soon released, but the PFLP continued to hold 58 hostages in order to exert pressure on the European governments.  The hostages were released on September 25, 26 and 29.  On September 29, the Swiss government announced that the British, Swiss and West German governments would free seven Arab guerrillas when the last six hostages, who were US citizens, had left Jordan.  The seven prisoners were released and flown to Cairo on September 30.  Twenty-five persons who were held hostage for 22 days reached a combined $370,000 out-of-court settlement with Trans World Airlines whose 707 jet was one of the planes hijacked.  Awards in the settlement ranged from $17,500 for a single person to a combined $80,000 for a six-member family.  The attorney for the plaintiffs said, It is one of the first cases where an airline accepted responsibility for recovery for mental anguish (suffered by passengers) in hijacking cases.
GREECE.  Two members of the ELF who attempted to hijack an Ethiopian airliner in Athens were foiled by security guards.
JORDAN.  John Stewart, the U.S. Cultural Affairs Adviser in Jordan, was kidnapped and held for one day by the PLO.  He was interrogated. No ransom demands were made and he was released unharmed the following day.
ARGENTINA.  A bomb exploded at the door to the USIS Binational Center in Sucre.
CANADA.  Members of the Quebec Liberation Front (FLQ) kidnapped James R. Cross, British trade commissioner in Quebec Province, and demanded as ransom the release of 13 imprisoned FLQ members and their flight to Algeria or Cuba, the publication of the FLQ manifesto, the payment of $500,000 in gold, the publication of the name of the informant whose tip had led police to raid an FLQ hideout in June, and the reinstatement of certain post office workers who had lost their jobs.  The Canadian government rejected the demands but attempted (unsuccessfully) to communicate with the kidnappers.FLQ members kidnapped Pierre LaPorte, minister of labor in the Quebec government.  The kidnappers warned that they would kill LaPorte if the demands made by Cross's kidnappers were not met.  The government again rejected the demands, but offered the kidnappers a safe conduct out of the country if the two hostages were released unharmed.  On October 16, the federal government of Canada invoked emergency powers which authorized police and troops to conduct searches and make arrests without warrants.  On October 18, LaPorte's body was found in the trunk of a car.  In a massive hunt for the kidnappers, more than 500 suspected members and sympathizers of the FLQ were arrested.  Three were later convicted.On December 3, James Cross's kidnappers dropped all of their previous demands and released him unharmed in return for safe conduct to Cuba. On December 28, 1971, LaPorte's kidnappers were arrested.  They were subsequently tried, found guilty, and sentenced to life imprisonment. In December 1978, a French-Canadian couple ended their self-exile in France to face trial in Montreal for the kidnapping of Cross.  They refused to plead to the charges in a preliminary hearing.  The judge entered a plea of not guilty on their behalf.  On August 7, 1979, Jacques and Louise Cossette-Trudel received two-year jail sentences for the kidnapping.  Jacques Lanctot, brother of Louise Cossette-Trudel, was given a longer sentence because he refused to express regret for his actions when he pleaded guilty.On June 9, 1982, Yves Langlois, the last of the five Quebec separatist guerrillas wanted for the kidnapping of James Cross, returned home to Montreal from exile in France.  He pleaded guilty to forcible detention, extortion and conspiracy.  In September 1982, Langlois was sentenced to one day less than two years and was ordered to do 150 hours of community work after his release.
TURKEY.  A bomb that failed to detonate was found under the vehicle of a member of the U.S. Air Force near his Ankara apartment.
BOLIVIA.  The USIS offices in Oruro and La Paz were dynamited and taken over by demonstrators.
IRAN.  An Iranian airliner was hijacked to Baghdad by Iranian terrorists seeking the release of 21 prisoners held in Iran.
PERU.  A small explosion occurred at an American firm in Lima.
AUSTRALIA.  A bomb was located at the Yugoslav consulate in Melbourne. Croatian terrorists were believed responsible.
PAKISTAN.  The Polish deputy foreign minister was assassinated in Karachi by a Pakistani who drove a truck into a reception line that was greeting Polish officials at the airport.  Four persons were killed and 10 injured in the attack.
ARGENTINA.  Four hours after a bomb went off at the home of the U.S. agricultural attache, a bomb was discovered at the front door of the home of another U.S. embassy officer.
PUERTO RICO.  The Armed Commandos of Liberation claimed responsibility for a bomb that did some damage to the Dominican Republic consulate in San Juan.
ARGENTINA.  The homes of three U.S. military attaches in Martinez, a suburb of Buenos Aires, were raided by armed men who left leaflets identifying them as members of the Peronist Armed Forces (FAP).  They stole official documents, weapons, uniforms, and U.S. currency.
SPAIN.  Members of the ETA kidnapped Eugene Beihl, the honorary West German consul in San Sebastian.  The kidnappers warned that Beihl's fate would depend on the sentence given to 15 Basques accused of murdering a head of the provincial police.  Subsequent events suggest the possibility that a deal was made:  Beihl was released unharmed on December 24; the Basques were sentenced on December 28 -- nine of them to long prison terms and six to death; Generalissimo Franco commuted the six death sentences to 30 years on December 30.
BOLIVIA.  The door of the USIS building in Santa Cruz was dynamited, causing minor damage.
TURKEY.  Two Ankara University students were apprehended while they were trying to dynamite the U.S.  Air Force Tuslog Detachment 30 in Ankara.
URUGUAY.  Tupamaros kidnapped Geoffrey M.S. Jackson, British ambassador to Uruguay, and demanded the release of 150 prisoners as ransom.  The government refused to negotiate and instead offered a reward for information leading to the ambassador or his captors. Jackson was held in a people's prison for eight months, and was released on September 9, just three days after 106 of the prisoners on the kidnappers' list escaped from jail.  The Tupamaros announced that there was no longer any need to keep Jackson.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  A surreptitiously planted explosive device went off in the main entrance hall of the Munich Amerika Haus, causing extensive damage.
PHILIPPINES.  The People's Revolutionary Front bombed the Manila headquarters of the U.S. oil companies Esso and Caltex, killing a Filipino employee and damaging the offices.
TURKEY.  Bombs were found on the grounds of the U.S. embassy and the U.S.  Information Service buildings in Ankara.
GREECE.  Small homemade bombs damaged two cars belonging to U.S. military personnel in Athens.
TURKEY.  A bomb was found in an Ankara building occupied by three American military families.
TURKEY.  The TPLA (Turkish Peoples' Liberation Army) kidnapped James Finlay, an unarmed U.S. Air Force security policeman patrolling the Ankara Air Station, but made no ransom demands.  He reportedly had come upon them as they tried to steal arms from the base.  He was released 17 hours after his capture.
TURKEY.  A U.S.  Army passenger boat in Istanbul was damaged by a bomb.  Another bomb was found in a second boat.
UNITED STATES.  Two unidentified people threw a firebomb from a passing car at the Iraqi mission to the United Nations in New York City.
PAKISTAN.  While the guard was forced away at gunpoint, two small bombs were thrown into the ground floor of the building housing the U.S. consulate in Dacca.
PAKISTAN.  Several shots were fired at the home of the U.S. consul general in Dacca, penetrating the master bedroom suite.
TURKEY.  A bomb exploded in the garden of the US consulate general's residence in Izmir, causing no injuries or property damage.
TURKEY.  Five bombs with fuses still smoking were discovered outside the CENTO secretariat building in Ankara; a bomb exploded outside the CENTO headquarters in Ankara.
URUGUAY.  Automatic weapons fire and a bazooka-like projectile were directed at a U.S. embassy residence in Montevideo.  The perpetrator was unknown.
ARGENTINA.  Members of the ERP attacked the residence of the Uruguayan naval attache in Buenos Aires.
UNITED STATES.  A bomb damaged the New York City offices of AMTORG, the Soviet Trading Corporation.  Twenty minutes earlier a group using JDL slogans had phoned UPI to warn of the bombing.  JDL denied responsibility.
ARGENTINA.  The Luis Blanco and Adolfo Bello units of the ERP placed eleven bombs in U.S. business offices in Rosario.
ARGENTINA.  The Luis Blanco and Adolfo Bello units of the ERP placed eleven bombs in U.S. business offices in Rosario.
ARGENTINA.  The Luis Blanco and Adolfo Bello units of the ERP placed eleven bombs in U.S. business offices in Rosario.
ARGENTINA.  The ERP bombed three foreign businesses in Buenos Aires.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC.  A U.S. embassy contract watchman was killed by an unknown assailant who fired upon the embassy.
UNITED STATES.  A faulty timing device prevented a JDL bomb from exploding at the Soviet Union's estate in Glen Cove, New York.
UNITED STATES.  A bomb exploded outside the building housing the Mexican Government Tourism Department, causing minor damage.
VENEZUELA.  Fire was set in front of the quarters of one U.S. military group official in Caracas.
ARGENTINA.  The USIS Lincoln Library in Buenos Aires was extensively damaged by a firebomb.
UNITED STATES.  A JDL firebomb destroyed a Soviet Union embassy official's car in New York City.
HONDURAS.  The U.S. military group headquarters was bombed.
UNITED STATES.  The MIRA, a Puerto Rican independence group, was credited with nine firebombings of groceries and supermarkets in Greenwich Village and Harlem.  In Hoboken, New Jersey, the group claimed credit for the firebombings of seven stores.
ECUADOR.  A bomb exploded in front of the U.S. consulate section in Guayaquil, causing no injuries.
HONDURAS.  A bomb exploded on the back wall of the U.S. embassy at the rear of the parking lot.  No injuries.
UNITED STATES.  A caller to UPI claimed credit for bombing the entrance of Zaire's U.N. mission in New York City for the Black Revolutionary Assault Team.  He claimed, We bombed it because they refused to allow our freedom fighters to cross their country to get to Angola.  Three passersby were injured by the explosion.
COLOMBIA.  Ten firebombs were found at the Chapinero, Bogota store of a U.S. firm. One of the devices exploded, but caused no damage.
GREECE.  Two bombs exploded in U.S. vehicles, causing no injuries and slight damage to the vehicles.
UNITED STATES.  Anti-monarchist Iranian students dynamited the Iranian consulate in San Francisco, causing $1 million damage to the consulate and nearby houses and injuring four people.  The group was protesting the Shah's lavish celebration of the twenty-five hundredth anniversary of the Persian Empire.
JORDAN.  For the third time in two months Palestinian commandos damaged the Trans-Arabian Pipeline in Jordan near the Syrian border.  Jordan accused the Syrians of involvement in each case.
BRAZIL.  Molotov cocktails damaged a car belonging to the U.S.  consul general, and the homes of officials of Swift & Company and Chicago Bridge Company in Sao Paulo.
COLOMBIA.  Fourteen incendiary bombs were placed in the San Martin store of a U.S. firm.  Four of them worked but caused only minor damage.
UNITED STATES.  Jewish Armed Resistance claimed responsibility for bombing two Russian gift shops, one in New York and the other in Minnesota. The bombs shattered glass.
UNITED KINGDOM.  BSO (Black September Organization) members attempted to assassinate Zaid Rifai, the Jordanian ambassador, in London.
ISRAEL.  An American nurse was killed and several people were wounded in a terrorist attack in Israeli-occupied Gaza.
UNITED STATES.  Members of the JDL firebombed the New York offices of the late Sol Hurok, who managed U.S. tours by Soviet performers.
BRAZIL.  A British sailor on shore leave in Rio de Janeiro was killed by machine-gun fire from a passing car.  A leaflet signed by four Brazilian extremists claimed the action was an expression of solidarity with the combatants of Ireland and of all the world.
GREECE.  The car of the commander of JUSMAAG was damaged by a bomb believed placed by the Resistance, Liberation and Independence Organization (AAA).
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  The Black September Organization sabotaged the Esso oil pipeline near Hamburg, claiming that the company had aided the Israelis.
GREECE.  A bomb went off in the private automobile of the USIS press officer in front of his home.
ARGENTINA.  Members of the ERP kidnapped Oberdan Sallustro, president of the Italian-owned company, Fiat of Argentina.  They demanded that 50 guerrillas be released, that $l million in ransom in the form of school supplies and shoes be given to school children in poor areas of the country, and that Fiat reinstate 250 workers who had been fired in a labor dispute.  The kidnappers said Sallustro was responsible for repression of the workers.Fiat accepted the ransom demand, but the Argentine government refused to release the prisoners and warned that Fiat executives would be prosecuted for illicit associations unless they broke off contact with the kidnappers.  Police launched an all-out search and discovered the kidnappers' hideout on April 10.  Just before they were captured, the kidnappers executed Sallustro.
CANADA.  A bomb exploded in the Cuban Trade Office in Montreal.  One person was killed and seven others were injured.  Authorities arrested seven Cuban officials and charged six of them with possessing weapons and interfering with the police investigation.  A phone call the next day claimed the bombings had been carried out by a group called the Young Cubans in the name of Alejandro Del Valle, who died in the Bay of Pigs invasion.
UNITED STATES.  The Secret Army Organization, an American right-wing group that targeted underground anti-war organizations, bombed the Guild Theater in San Diego, California.  The building was damaged, but the blast did not result in any casualties.
SWEDEN.  The Turkish tourist office was bombed in response to Ankara's parliament ratifying the death sentences of three TPLA members convicted of kidnapping three U.S. servicemen in 1971.
UNITED KINGDOM.  A small petrol bomb was thrown against the entrance to the U.S. embassy in London, causing very little damage.
ARGENTINA.  Members of a group calling itself the Comite Argentino de Lucha Anti-Imperialisto bombed one Dutch and four U.S.  firms.
VENEZUELA.  Four incendiary devices ignited in the USIS Binational Center library in Caracas in the early evening.  Seven more were removed by Venezuelan police prior to detonation and were found to consist of potassium chlorate contained in cigarette and match boxes.
ZIMBABWE.  A South African Airways B727 flying from Salisbury to Johannesburg with sixty six persons on board was hijacked by two Lebanese who threatened to blow up the aircraft.  At a refueling stop in Salisbury they allowed some of the passengers to get off.  They diverted the plane to Balantyre, Malawi, and demanded money from the Anglo-American Mining Company. On May 25 all passengers and crew escaped.  Troops fired on the jet after the last of the hostages were safe.  No injuries were reported and the hijackers were captured.
FRANCE.  Bombs exploded at the TWA office in Paris. The Committee of Coordination took responsibility for the action, claiming it was in protest of U.S. bombing in North Vietnam.
UNITED STATES.  Two hijackers, identified as William Holder, 22, and Catherine Kerkow, 20, took over a Western Airlines jet as it began its descent in Seattle, Washington.  The couple ordered the plane to New York where Holder picked up $500,000 in ransom money and exchanged 36 hostages for a navigator to take the jet to Algiers. At Algiers, the hijackers asked for asylum and were taken into custody.In 1980, Holder, a former Black Panther, received a suspended five-year prison sentence in Paris, France.  It was the first time a French court had tried a person accused of hijacking an airliner abroad. The decision to prosecute was made under an international agreement signed in The Hague in 1970 and an article of the French penal code that had never been invoked before.  Holder was charged in May 1975, together with his companion Catherine Kerkow, who is still at large and will be tried in absentia.
ITALY.  Offices of IBM, Honeywell and the Bank of America were bombed in Milan.  The factory of Honeywell in Milan was also bombed.  Leaflets left at the sites hailed the struggle of the Vietnamese people against American imperialism and victories of the revolutionary and Communist army in Vietnam.
ARGENTINA.  Bombs damaged the offices of four U.S.-owned firms.
LEBANON.  Shafiq al-Hout, PLO director in Beirut, was sent a letter bomb, but it was detected before it could explode.  Marwan Dajani, an Al Fatah leader, and Abu al-Hassan, a PLO intelligence officer, were sent letter bombs also, which were deactivated before they could explode.
LEBANON.  Gassan Kanafani, editor of the PFLP's weekly journal Al Hadef, who was also a spokesman for the PFLP and number four in the group's hierarchy, died when a bomb exploded in his car, in front of his home in Hazmiyeh, outside Beirut.  His niece was also killed by the explosion.  There was speculation that Israeli agents were involved in the assassination.
PHILIPPINES.  An attache case containing fifteen pounds of explosives was discovered in the USIS Cultural Center in Manila.  The case had been checked at the desk by an unknown patron on Friday evening, and the device was set to explode at 1 AM Saturday.  The guard did not check the case until Monday morning, and the building was saved only because of the failure of the timing device.
UNITED STATES.  A group of hijackers, later identified as George Edward Wright, George Brown, Melvin McNair, his wife Jean Allen McNair, and Joyce T. Burgess, who said they were Black Panther Party sympathizers, took over a Delta Air Lines jet over Florida and directed the plane to Algeria after collecting $1 million in ransom.  There were 101 persons aboard.  At the hijackers' orders, the plane landed in Miami where passengers were allowed to leave the jet after the ransom was paid.  Upon their arrival in Algeria, the Algerian authorities impounded the ransom money and took the hijackers into custody.  The hijackers were released on August 4 and the ransom money was later returned to Delta, in spite of a request by American Black Panthers in exile in Algeria that the money be turned over to them.On November 24, 1978, Melvin McNair, Jean McNair, George Brown, and Joyce Tillerson were convicted by a French court for the hijacking.  All received five year sentences, but two years were suspended from the women's terms.  In the United States, they would have faced 20 years; U.S. extradition requests were denied by an earlier court when the defense attorney argued that the group was being persecuted because of their race and beliefs.
PHILIPPINES.  A bomb exploded near the wall of the seafront embassy staff housing apartments of the U.S. embassy in Manila.
FRANCE.  A bomb was found in the washroom of an Air France B747 flying from Paris to Montreal with 354 persons aboard.  The plane landed in Gander, where the bomb was dismantled.
SPAIN.  Five well-dressed youths entered the doorway of the USIS cultural center in Madrid and hurled four Molotov cocktails into the entrance area before a guard, seated at a desk in the area, could stand up.
MEXICO.  Seven bombs went off in offices of U.S.-owned businesses, causing considerable property damage during Mexico's Independence Day.
LEBANON.  A Venezuelan Airlines DC8 flying from Beirut to Caracas with ninety-seven persons on board landed at Cyprus after a caller said that there was a bomb on board.  A powerful time bomb was found in the rear toilet.  Dr. Atef Harkous, Hussein Harkous, and Adnan Harkous were arrested.
FRANCE.  The Israeli embassy in Paris discovered two large envelopes containing explosives.  The devices were defused.They were part of the almost 50 letter bombs mailed from Amsterdam.  The BSO claimed responsibility.
UNITED KINGDOM.  Eight letter bombs addressed to Israeli officials were intercepted in London.They were part of the almost 50 letter bombs mailed from Amsterdam.  The BSO claimed responsibility.
UNITED KINGDOM.  Eight letter bombs addressed to Israeli officials were intercepted in London.They were part of the almost 50 letter bombs mailed from Amsterdam.  The BSO claimed responsibility.
SWITZERLAND.  Five letter bombs addressed to Israeli officials were intercepted in Geneva.They were part of the almost 50 letter bombs mailed from Amsterdam.  The BSO claimed responsibility.
ISRAEL.  Two letter bombs addressed to Israeli officials were found in Tel Aviv and Jeruslem.  One of them was addressed to Shimon Peres, minister of transport.  One exploded in the Jerusalem Post Office, injuring a postal worker.They were part of the almost 50 letter bombs mailed from Amsterdam.  The BSO claimed responsibility.
CANADA.  Six letter bombs addressed to Israeli officials were intercepted in Ottawa.  A seventh was found in Montreal.They were part of the almost 50 letter bombs mailed from Amsterdam.  The BSO claimed responsibility.
BELGIUM.  Israeli security guards found a letter bomb in the Israeli embassy in Brussels.It was part of the almost 50 letter bombs mailed from Amsterdam.  The BSO claimed responsibility.
ISRAEL.  Ten more letter bombs addressed to Israeli officials were intercepted in a Jerusalem post office.They were part of the almost 50 letter bombs mailed from Amsterdam.  The BSO claimed responsibility.
ISRAEL.  Ten more letter bombs addressed to Israeli officials were intercepted in a Jerusalem post office.They were part of the almost 50 letter bombs mailed from Amsterdam.  The BSO claimed responsibility.
ARGENTINA.  Israeli security agents found a letter bomb in their embassy in Buenos Aires.  Amsterdam police believe that the BSO members had entered their country the previous week and slipped out after sending the letter bombs.
JORDAN.  The Amman post office discovered and defused four more of the Amsterdam letter bombs addressed to Jordanian officials.They were part of the almost 50 letter bombs mailed from Amsterdam.  The BSO claimed responsibility.
FRANCE.  A bomb exploded in an Arab bookstore in Paris.  A group calling itself Masada, Action and Defense Movement, claimed responsibility.  Israel disclaimed any knowledge of the group.
UNITED STATES.  Two of the Malaysian-postmarked letter bombs were delivered to two New York women active in American Zionist circles.  They opened the envelopes, but the bombs did not explode. The BSO claimed responsibility.
ITALY.  Awel Abdel Zwaiter, a Palestinian who had lived in Rome for 16 years and was employed as a translator by the Libyan embassy, was killed by 12 bullets to the head.  The assailants were never caught. Intelligence sources indicate that Zwaiter was responsible for a bomb that exploded in the luggage compartment of an El Al flight from Rome in August 1972 and was regarded as head of Black September in Italy.
ISRAEL.  Police intercepted letter-bombs mailed in Israel and addressed to President Richard Nixon, Secretary of Defense Melvin Laird, and Secretary of State William Rogers.  The letters were mailed by Black September from Kiryat Shmona.  Suspicious Israeli postal workers intercepted the bombs.
ISRAEL.  Police intercepted letter-bombs mailed in Israel and addressed to President Richard Nixon, Secretary of Defense Melvin Laird, and Secretary of State William Rogers.  The letters were mailed by Black September from Kiryat Shmona.  Suspicious Israeli postal workers intercepted the bombs.
LEBANON.  A letter bomb addressed to the PFLP's newspaper offices in Beirut was intercepted in the post office, where it was rendered harmless.
EL SALVADOR.  A bomb was detonated in the Pan American Airways main ticket office in San Salvador, causing considerable damage but no casualties.
EL SALVADOR.  A small bomb exploded in a women's restroom in the Argentine/Brazilian pavilion of the Fifth International Trade Fair in San Salvador.  The bomb was similar to that used in the bombing of the local Pan American World Airways office ten days before.
VENEZUELA.  The residence of the Honduran ambassador to Venezuela was sprayed by machine-gun fire.  There were no casualties.
ETHIOPIA.  Seven Ethiopian students attempted unsuccessfully to hijack an Ethiopian Airlines aircraft shortly after takeoff from Addis Ababa.  One of the hijackers exploded a hand grenade which tore a twelve to fifteen inch hole in the floor, damaging electrical wires and some control cables.  Eleven were wounded. Six of the hijackers died and one of the women was seriously wounded when she was arrested.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  A small bomb that had been placed against the door of the U.S. Berlin brigade non-commissioned officers' club opposite the U.S. headquarters exploded.
GREECE.  Incendiary devices ignited under two automobiles owned by U.S. government employees in Athens.  There were no casualties.
LEBANON.  A small charge of dynamite wrecked a basement restroom in the American University of Beirut.  A preliminary investigation provided no clue to the identity or motive of the bomber.
CYPRUS.  A representative of Al Fatah, Hussein Abad al-Khair, switched off the light in his hotel room in Nicosia and was killed by a time bomb that had been placed under his bed, detonated by a radio transmitter from across the street.  Police later found a $5,000 check drawn by a Cypriot known to be an agent of the KGB.  Palestinians claimed that Israeli agents were responsible for the assassination.
FRANCE.  A powerful bomb blast damaged a branch of the Spanish Banco Popular in Paris.  No one was injured.
UNITED KINGDOM.  Three Pakistani youths attacked the Indian High Commission in London and held staff members hostage, injuring some of them.  British police shot two of the gunmen and arrested the third, who said they belonged to a group called Black December, and that they had intended to take hostages in order to obtain an audience with Prime Minister Indira Ghandi to demand the release of Pakistani prisoners of war.
LEBANON.  The Greek charter ship Sanya carrying 250 U.S.  tourists bound for Haifa, Israel, sank in Beirut harbor following an explosion on board.  There were no casualties.  An official investigation revealed that the explosion was caused by a device placed against the side of the ship below the waterline.  The BSO claimed credit for the incident.
UNITED STATES.  An elaborate network of explosives was found in the trunks of cars parked outside of the El Al Israel Airlines air terminal at Kennedy Airport, the First Israel Bank and Trust Company, and the Israel Discount Bank, in New York.  Police, having been tipped off by Israelis, were able to dismantle the bombs.  A search of the vehicles also revealed a quantity of paper with Black September's letterhead.  The FBI reported that the bombs were set to go off on March 4 during Israeli Premier Golda Meir's New York visit, but an error in their circuits caused them not to explode. An Iraqi PLO official was arrested in Italy in 1991 and was charged with setting the bombs.  He went on trial in Brooklyn in March 1993.
GREECE.  An explosive device with incendiary capability was detonated on the private vehicle of a U.S. government employee in Athens, causing minor damage.  Painted on the door were the letters EAN, an acronym for a group called Greek Anti-Dictatorial Youth.
LEBANON.  An explosion destroyed several cars in Beirut but caused no casualties.  The BSO said the blast was an attempt by Jordanian intelligence operatives to assassinate Ziyad Al Hilu, a BSO official who participated in the assassination of Jordanian Prime Minister Wasfi Tal in Cairo on November 28, 1971.
FRANCE.  Basil Raoud al-Kubaisi, an Iraqi law professor, was shot to death in Paris by two unidentified men.  The PFLP issued a statement in Beirut saying that he was shot while carrying out a PFLP mission. It was suggested that he was setting up arsenals for Black September in several Arab diplomatic offices in Europe.  The Mossad Wrath of God teams were suspected in the death.
CYPRUS.  Zayad Murchesi, who had been sent to Nicosia by Arafat to replace Hussein Abad al-Khair, killed under similar circumstances on January 24, 1973, turned off the light in his hotel room and was immediately killed in the explosion.
LEBANON.  Terrorists  tried to blow up the Trans-Arabian Pipeline to Zahrani, but only succeeded in denting it.  The flow of oil was not affected by the minor damage.  On February 27, 1974, a military court sentenced two Palestinian guerrillas to seven years imprisonment for the attack.  The two men were said to have been working for the PFLP-GC and for the PFLP.  The attack was in retaliation for an Israeli raid in Beirut on April 10, 1973.
PUERTO RICO.  A bomb exploded at the Dominican Republic consulate in San Juan causing slight damage and no injuries.  The bomb was claimed by Dominican exiles and timed to coincide with the celebration of the eighth anniversary of the Dominican revolt.
EL SALVADOR.  An explosion caused extensive damage to IBM Corporation offices in San Salvador.
SPAIN.  The British European Airways office in Barcelona was firebombed.
SPAIN.  Two firebombs thrown at Pan American World Airways offices in Barcelona broke all the windows and caused considerable smoke damage.
GREECE.  A pipe bomb exploded, damaging the automobile of a U.S. citizen employed at the Athens airport.
BRAZIL.  Fire, believed to have been started by an incendiary device hurled at the home, damaged the home of a U.S. diplomat in Sao Paulo.
IRAN.  Lieutenant Colonel Lewis Hawkins, an American military adviser in Iran, was shot and killed by gunmen who were believed to be members of a leftist guerrilla group.
PERU.  A small bomb destroyed the iron gate of the French embassy in Lima.  The bombing was believed to be a protest against the planned French nuclear tests in the Pacific.
GREECE.  A lone Palestinian guerrilla armed with a machine gun and hand grenades attempted to attack the El Al Israel Airlines office in Athens.  He was prevented from entering the office when a guard pressed a security lock that closed inner doors made of bullet-proof glass.  The terrorist then fled to a nearby hotel where he cornered 17 hostages.  Negotiations undertaken by the ambassadors of Egypt, Libya, and Iraq continued for several hours.  It was finally agreed to let the terrorist fly to Kuwait, where he vanished.  The hostages were unharmed.  The man said he was a member of the Organization of Victims of Occupied Territories.  Arab officials said that they had no knowledge of the organization.
PERU.  Bombs thrown from a passing car exploded at the Peruvian-North American Cultural Institute.
HONDURAS.  A tear-gas bomb was fired into the offices of the Organization of American States in Tegucigalpa.
ECUADOR.  A bomb exploded near the U.S.  consulate in Guayaquil, breaking 35 windows, but no one was injured.
CHILE.  Police disarmed pipe bombs found at the homes of three U.S. embassy officials in Santiago.
PARAGUAY.  Ian Martin, a British citizen and manager of Liegib's Meat Company, was kidnapped in Asuncion.  Although a ransom note signed by the ERP was found in Martin's car, Paraguayan authorities believed the kidnapping was the work of the MoPoCo, a dissident faction of the ruling Colorado Party.  Martin was rescued unharmed on September 6 by Paraguayan police.  Two of the kidnappers were killed and an undisclosed number were arrested.
FRANCE.  One of the IRA letter bombs was discovered at the British embassy in Paris.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  A bomb destroyed the Israeli exhibit at the West Berlin International Radio and Television Fair.  There were no injuries, but damage was extensive.  A West German news agency later received a letter in which the BSO claimed responsibility.
BELGIUM.  An IRA letter bomb was received by a British official in Brussels.
AUSTRIA.  Three Jewish emigres en route from the Soviet Union to Israel and an Austrian customs official were seized by two armed Arabs who claimed to be members of the Eagles of the Palestinian Revolution, which is believed to be an offshoot of Al Fatah.  The terrorists seized their hostages aboard a train, and later commandeered a car and drove to the Vienna airport.  They demanded that the Austrian government close Schoenau Castle, a transit camp for Jewish emigres operated by a Jewish agency.  The Austrian government agreed and the terrorists released their hostages and were flown to Libya.
COLOMBIA.  Two U.S.  citizens employed by the Frontino Goldmines were kidnapped.  On October 5, the kidnappers, who were thought to be members of the National Liberation Army of Colombia (ELN), sent a letter demanding $168,990 ransom to International Mining Company, owner of the mines.  The board of directors of International Mining in New York decided to pay the ransom.
ARGENTINA.  Bombs exploded in front of the offices of two U.S. companies, Coca-Cola and Firestone Tire and Rubber, and one German company, Mercedes- Benz, in Cordoba.  There were no casualties.
LEBANON.  Five guerrillas who said they were members of a small left-wing guerrilla group called the Lebanese Socialist Revolutionary Organization raided a Bank of America office in Beirut and held 40 people hostage.  They demanded the payment of $10 million to finance the Arab war effort against Israel, the release of Palestinian guerrillas held in Lebanon, and safe passage to Algeria or Southern Yemen.  The Bank of America refused to pay the $10 million.  Both Southern Yemen and Algeria refused asylum to the terrorists.After 25 hours, police and army commandos stormed the bank.  John Crawford Maxwell, a U.S.  citizen, had been executed by the terrorists.  In the battle, one policeman was killed and six policemen were wounded; five bank employees and five passersby were also wounded.  Two guerrillas were killed in the assault, one was critically wounded, a fourth surrendered unharmed, and a fifth was captured later.  The surviving members of the guerrilla group were sentenced by a Beirut court on March 9, 1974.  Adel Najin Abu-Asi was sentenced to death for the murder of John Crawford Maxwell.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  Two subsidiaries of ITT, one in Nuremburg and one in West Berlin, were damaged by bomb blasts.  No injuries were reported.
LEBANON.  Four Palestinian guerrillas belonging to Arab Nationalist Youth for the Liberation of Palestine hijacked a KLM Royal Dutch Airlines jumbo jet shortly after it took off from Beirut.  The plane was forced to fly first to Syria and then to Cyprus, Libya, and Malta. The hijackers demanded that KLM cease transporting arms to Israel, that the Dutch government drastically change its pro-Israel stance, and that The Netherlands no longer render aid in the emigration of Soviet Jews to Israel.  All 247 passengers and 17 crew members were released unharmed on November 27, 1973.  The hijackers surrendered after getting a safe passage guarantee from Dubai.
CHILE.  A fire broke out in the commercial section of the former Soviet embassy in Santiago.  Almost simultaneously an incendiary bomb was thrown from a speeding car at the front door of the former residence of the Soviet ambassador.  Police thought that the attacks were in possible retaliation for the occupation by members of a Communist Youth Movement of the Chilean embassy in Paris the day before.
ITALY.  At least 32 people were killed and 18 were wounded at the Rome airport when five Arab guerrillas attacked a Middle East-bound Pan American World Airways jet airliner, spraying it with bombs and machine gun fire, hurling hand grenades into it and setting it on fire.  The guerrillas then commandeered a Lufthansa German Airlines plane and flew to Athens with a number of hostages.  From Athens the hijackers flew to Damascus and then to Kuwait where they released 12 hostages and surrendered to the Kuwait government.  At one point, the hijackers demanded the release of two Palestinian terrorists held in Greece for the August 5, 1973, attack at the Athens airport.  On March 2, 1974, the five extremists were flown to Cairo under the responsibility of the PLO, which said that the five men would be tried by a revolutionary court for carrying out an unauthorized operation detrimental to the Palestinian cause.
UNITED STATES.  Two bombs damaged the 573-ton Mereghan A1 as it awaited cargo at a Miami river dock.  In a call to the news media, a man who identified himself as a spokesman for a Cuban liberation group in Miami said the action was directed against the government of the Bahamas for the murder of Cuban nationals.  (This Cuban liberation group may be FLNC--Frente de Liberacion Nacional Cubana (Cuban National Liberation Front)--a Miami-based exile group responsible for several attacks in 1974.)
SWITZERLAND.  Bombs exploded in Turin and Zurich, apparently thrown by Spanish extremists protesting the sentencing to death of a Barcelona student radical.  In Turin the target was a building housing the Spanish consulate and the Spanish Chamber of Commerce, neither of which was damaged.  In Zurich, a bomb exploded in a post office located beneath the Spanish consulate general.  No injuries were reported.
ITALY.  A bomb damaged the door of a Turin building housing the Spanish consulate and chamber of commerce, but caused no injuries.
GREECE.  Homemade pipe bombs caused minor damage to three cars belonging to U.S.  military personnel.  The cars all carried distinctive yellow foreign mission license plates.  Calls to the press identified the perpetrators as dissident students.
PERU.  A Cuban Action package containing high explosives detonated at the Cuban embassy in Lima.
MEXICO.  Bombs exploded at Pepsi-Cola and Union Carbide plants in Guadalajara.  Bombs also damaged a Coca-Cola bottling plant, a bakery, and federal offices in Oaxaca.  Damage was put at more than $400,000. No casualties or arrests were reported.
PAKISTAN.  Three gunmen, members of a group called Moslem International Guerrillas, seized a Greek freighter in the port of Karachi.  They threatened to blow up the ship and kill two hostages unless the Greek government freed two Arab terrorists who were being held in Athens under sentence of death for the August 5, 1973 attack at the Athens airport. After lengthy negotiations with Pakistani authorities and three Arab ambassadors, the attackers accepted a Greek government agreement to commute the sentences of the Athens terrorists.  The three gunmen were flown out of Karachi on a special PIA flight to Cairo on the evening of February 3 and flown to Libya the following day.
SPAIN. A Molotov cocktail was thrown at an Air France office in Barcelona.
SPAIN.  A package addressed to the Cuban embassy exploded in a Madrid post office, wounding a postal worker.
GREECE.  Two Greek demolition experts were killed while they were attempting to defuse a bomb found in the U.S.-owned Dow Chemical plant at Lavrion.  The bombs were believed to have been planted by people protesting U.S.  support of the Athens government.
IRAN.  A bomb was tossed into the British embassy compound during the evening.  There were no injuries, but some windows in the chancery were broken by the explosion.
ARGENTINA.  A bomb exploded at the front door of the Cordoba USIS Binational Center at 2 in the morning, causing some damage.
VENEZUELA.  Three incendiary bombs were discovered and disarmed at Sears stores in El Marques and Bello Monte.  Bandero Rojo (Red Flag) claimed responsibility.
JAMAICA.  The Cuban embassy in Kingston was bombed by the FLNC - National Front for the Liberation of Cuba.
MEXICO.  A bomb was thrown at the offices of Cubana de Aviacion by unidentified persons, causing considerable property damage.  The Cuban group FLNC claimed responsibility for the bombing.
ARGENTINA.  Alfred Laun, head of the U.S. Information Service branch in Cordoba, was wounded and kidnapped by the ERP.  The guerrillas said that Laun would be interrogated on counterrevolutionary activities in Vietnam, Santo Domingo, Brazil, and Bolivia, and for his active participation as a liaison in the Fascist military coup against our brother people in Chile.  He was also to have been interrogated on his ties with the CIA.  The guerrillas released Laun on April 13, 1974, apparently because of the seriousness of his wounds.
EGYPT.  An extremist organization led by an Iraqi national and having connections with Libya was behind an armed attack on the Technical Military Academy in Cairo.  Eleven people were killed and 27 injured in the attack.  Among those arrested in the next few days was a Palestinian who was believed to be the ringleader.  He confessed that the aim of his organization, the Islamic Liberation Organization, was to overthrow existing regimes in Arab countries.
UNITED STATES.   The Caribe Star was sunk in Los Angeles Harbor by a bomb placed on its sea chest. The 120 foot long former Catalina ferry had been sold to Arab interests and refitted as a luxury yacht.  The Jewish Defense League claimed responsibility.
LEBANON.  An explosive device placed against the outside of the reinforced concrete wall of the USIS Regional Service Center blew a hole in the wall.  The plastic charge did not cause any major damage to the printing presses or any personal damage.  The Lebanese Socialist Revolutionary Movement (Shibbu gang) claimed responsibility for the incident.
BELGIUM.  A stolen automobile loaded with cans of gasoline exploded outside the office of Iberia Airlines in Brussels.  The blast injured one person and caused heavy damage to the building, which also houses the First National Bank and the American-owned Westbury Hotel.  Cars containing similar explosive charges were discovered and disarmed by Belgium police in front of Iberia Airlines offices in Liege and Antwerp.  On the basis of pamphlets found at subsequent similar incidents, Belgium authorities believe that GARI was responsible for the explosions.
LEBANON.  The detonation of a small explosive charge at the John F. Kennedy USIS Library and Cultural Center caused minor injuries to three local employees and some damage to the installation.  The Revolutionary Arab Youth Organization claimed responsibility.  In May 1975 several terrorists were sentenced to prison for this bombing.
UNITED STATES.  Two unidentified individuals suspected of being anti-Duvalier Haitian exiles threw a bomb on board a Haitian navy patrol boat drydocked at Ryder Yacht Basin in Miami.
ARGENTINA.  Three branch offices of the Bank of London were bombed.
ARGENTINA.  A series of bombs damaged the offices of two branches of the First National City Bank, two branches of Bank of Boston, a branch of the Bank of America, a Coca-Cola warehouse, Eveready offices, a Ford showroom, and offices of Parke-Davis and Xerox.
ARGENTINA.  A series of bombs damaged the offices of two branches of the First National City Bank, two branches of Bank of Boston, a branch of the Bank of America, a Coca-Cola warehouse, Eveready offices, a Ford showroom, and offices of Parke-Davis and Xerox.
ARGENTINA.  Three branch offices of the Bank of London were bombed.
LEBANON.  A columnist and co-editor of An-Nahar was kidnapped in Beirut and released five days later.  The leader of the PLO, Yasser Arafat, cooperated fully in the search.  Three men, a Lebanese, a Syrian, and a Palestinian, were arrested in connection with the kidnapping.
LEBANON.  Four assailants attacked Chilean ambassador Alfredo Canales Marquis and his wife as they were entering their apartment in Beirut. The attackers fired four shots at the ambassador, wounding him critically.  All four assailants managed to escape.  The Lebanese Revolutionary Socialist Organization (Shibbu gang) claimed responsibility for the attempted assassination.
FRANCE.  Three policemen were injured when a bomb exploded on the roof of a covered playground near the Spanish consulate in Toulouse.  The blast was believed to be the work of Spanish anarchists.
FRANCE.  Three car-bomb explosions took place outside the offices of right-wing newspapers (L'Aurore and Minute) and the Jewish Social Fund.  French newspapers received a communique on August 5 with a PFLP signature claiming responsibility in the name of Commando Muhammad Boudia (an Algerian member of the PFLP who was killed in Paris in 1973 when his car exploded; he was allegedly killed because he was a leader in the BSO).  Two persons were slightly injured by the explosions.
BELGIUM.  Bombs exploded during the night in front of three branch offices of the Spanish Bank in Brussels, and during the morning rush hour in front of the downtown office of Iberia Airlines.  In the last blast, five persons were injured.  Pamphlets found at one of the banks were signed by GARI.
PUERTO RICO.  An explosive device containing nuts and bolts was detonated at the front door of the Venezuelan consulate in San Juan, causing extensive damage but no injuries.  The Cuban M-7 organization claimed it set the bomb to protest deals of the Venezuelan government with Cuban Premier Fidel Castro.
SOUTH KOREA.  The wife of President Chung Hee Park was fatally wounded by an assassin's bullet intended for her husband.  A 17-year-old girl was also killed by a stray bullet.  The assassin, identified as Mun Se Kwang, a Korean who had been living in Osaka, Japan, was seized after being wounded by security guards.  South Korean investigators charged that the attempted assassination of President Park had been plotted by the North Korean government.  Kwang had been a member of the Osaka branch of the Korean Youth League, an anti-Park organization of Korean residents in Japan.  He was reportedly recruited by North Korean agents in 1972 and assigned the mission of killing Park in November 1973.
GREECE.  After a TWA B0707 landed at Rome from Athens, a fire was discovered in the baggage compartment.  The fire was confined to an area near a suitcase containing an explosive device that malfunctioned and caused the fire.
GREECE.  A large bomb exploded in the parking lot of the U.S chancery in Athens, killing two terrorists who were carrying it.  The explosion caused extensive damage.
ARGENTINA.  A bomb exploded at the residence of the Chilean consul at Salta, causing considerable damage but no injuries.
THE NETHERLANDS.  Four members of the Japanese United Red Army seized 11 hostages at the French embassy in The Hague, including the French ambassador to The Netherlands, Jacques Senard.  The kidnappers demanded a $1 million ransom and the release of Yutaka Furuya, a Red Army member who had been arrested on July 21 at Orly Airport, Paris, for possessing counterfeit currency and false passports.  The French government agreed to the demands and Furuya was flown to Amsterdam's Schiphol Airport.  The gunmen freed their hostages on September 17.  The guerrillas were flown in a French jet to Syria, where they surrendered to Palestinian guerrillas. The terrorists returned $300,000 of the ransom, which they had obtained from the French government.  Syria promised safe conduct for the terrorists to a country of their choice and left them in the custody of the PLO.  The Paris office of the PLO denied that its organization had asked Syrian authorities to hand over the Japanese guerrillas and said it had nothing to do with The Hague affair.
ARGENTINA.  About 40 bombs exploded, most directed against ceremonies commemorating the military revolt which ended Juan Peron's first period of rule.  Montonero slogans and banners were in evidence at many of the bombings.  Targets included three Ford showrooms; Peugeot and IKA-Renault showrooms; Goodyear and Firestone Tire distributors; Riker and Eli Lilly pharmaceutical laboratories; Union Carbide Battery Company; Bank of Boston and Chase Manhattan Bank branches; Xerox Corporation; and Coca-Cola and Pepsi-Cola bottling companies.
ARGENTINA.  About 40 bombs exploded, most directed against ceremonies commemorating the military revolt which ended Juan Peron's first period of rule.  Montonero slogans and banners were in evidence at many of the bombings.  Targets included three Ford showrooms; Peugeot and IKA-Renault showrooms; Goodyear and Firestone Tire distributors; Riker and Eli Lilly pharmaceutical laboratories; Union Carbide Battery Company; Bank of Boston and Chase Manhattan Bank branches; Xerox Corporation; and Coca-Cola and Pepsi-Cola bottling companies.
ARGENTINA.  About 40 bombs exploded, most directed against ceremonies commemorating the military revolt which ended Juan Peron's first period of rule.  Montonero slogans and banners were in evidence at many of the bombings.  Targets included three Ford showrooms; Peugeot and IKA-Renault showrooms; Goodyear and Firestone Tire distributors; Riker and Eli Lilly pharmaceutical laboratories; Union Carbide Battery Company; Bank of Boston and Chase Manhattan Bank branches; Xerox Corporation; and Coca-Cola and Pepsi-Cola bottling companies.
ARGENTINA.  The Montoneros killed two persons and kidnapped Juan and Jorge Born, directors of Bunge and Born Company, one of the largest international trading conglomerates in Latin America.  The two persons killed were the Borns' chauffeur and the manager of one of the companies.  A communique at first reportedly demanded $60 million ransom in cash and supplies.  The kidnappers said that the Born brothers would be tried for the acts committed against the workers, the people, and the national interest by the monopolies to which they belong. The captives were found guilty and sentenced to one year in a people's prison. Juan Born was released several months later. Jorge Born was released on June 20, after the corporation agreed to pay the ransom.  Most of it was paid in cash, which the Montoneros said they would use to buy arms and build a popular organization.The Argentine government opposed the payment, which they noted equaled one-third of the country's national defense budget, and most of the negotiations had to be carried on in Europe.  Argentine police attempted to intercept $1.2 million in food and clothing which Bunge and Born had agreed to distribute in slum areas as part of the ransom. Later, two executives of the company were arrested by Argentine police.
ARGENTINA.  General Carlos Prats Gonzalez, former commander of the Chilean Army under the late President Salvador Allende, and his wife were killed in a bomb blast as they drove toward their Buenos Aires home.  (The General had gone into voluntary exile in Argentina after the 1973 coup in Santiago.) Suspicion immediately fell on a right-wing terrorist group that calls itself the Argentine Anti-Communist Alliance.  However, the possibility that Chileans might have been behind the bombing has not been ruled out.
ITALY.  Four terrorists invaded Face-Standard in Milan, a local ITT communications subsidiary, and set fire to a warehouse, causing about $9 million damage.  The same evening, the Avis Milan offices were bombed, with damage reported to be about $15,000.  An unsigned note delivered to the Milan office of the Italian news agency stated that the warehouse fire was revenge for ITT's role in Chile.
PERU.  Terrorists conducted an armed attack in Lima against a Coca-Cola factory.
SYRIA.  An explosion occurred at the Damascus office of the National Cash Register Company.  An office boy was killed and a cleaning woman wounded by the blast.  The Arab Communist Organization claimed responsibility.
ARGENTINA.  The USIS Binational Center and three affiliates of U.S. companies were targets of terrorist bombs.
TURKEY.  The residence of a U.S. serviceman assigned to the USDAO in Ankara was the target of automatic weapon fire.  Thirteen bullets hit the front of the residence and at least two entered the residence. No injuries were sustained.
ITALY.  Gasoline bombs were thrown into the Rome offices of IBM, Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company and three branches of the Italian affiliate of Bank of America.  One of the branches was damaged extensively. U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger was due to address the World Food Conference in Rome the next day.
MEXICO.  A bomb exploded in the car of the Cuban ambassador to Mexico, Fernando Lopez Muino.
UNITED STATES.  The Pan American Union building, headquarters of the Organization of American States in Washington, D.C., was bombed. There were no injuries, but damage was estimated at $100,000.  An anti-Castro group was suspected of being behind the bombing.  A caller allegedly connected with the bombing identified himself to United Press International as a member of the Cuban Movement C-4.
ITALY.  The Holger Meins Kommando claimed credit for a bomb planted at the West German consulate in Florence.
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES.  Four Palestinian terrorists hijacked a British Airways VC-10 jet from Dubai within the UAE and forced it to fly to Tunis after a refueling stop in Tripoli, Libya.  An Indian stewardess was shot in the back during a shootout on the plane, but her wound was not serious.  In addition to the hijackers, the plane carried 22 passengers, 13 crew members, and 12 ground-service employees who had been aboard the aircraft when it was seized.  The hijackers demanded that Egypt release 13 Palestinian guerrillas imprisoned in Cairo. (Eight had been convicted by Sudan for the slaying of three diplomats in Khartoum on March 1, 1973, and five were awaiting trial by the PLO for the December 17, 1973, attack on the Rome airport.) The demands were at first rejected by both the government of Egypt and the PLO.The hijackers released four passengers on November 22.  Thirteen more were released after the five terrorists involved in the Rome Airport raid were freed by Egypt and flown to Tunis.  Two other Palestinian guerrillas held by The Netherlands were also released at the hijackers' demand and were flown to Tunis.  The seven released Palestinian prisoners then boarded the plane.The hijackers shot and killed a West German hostage, Werner Gustav Kehl, on November 23, but the remaining hostages were released on November 25.  The hijackers then demanded asylum in Tunisia.  The Tunisian government agreed to their demands and the gunmen and the seven Palestinians surrendered to Tunisian authorities on November 25.On November 27, the PLO announced that it had arrested 26 persons in Lebanon and other Arab countries for their alleged involvement in the hijacking and that it would try the suspects in public.  On December 7, the Tunisian government handed over the 11 terrorists (the four hijackers and the seven other guerrillas who had been released from Cairo and The Netherlands) to the PLO.  They left Tunis in PLO custody for an undisclosed destination.  The four who hijacked the plane have been tried and sentenced, according to a January 24, 1975 PLO announcement.  The sentences were believed to be long prison terms.  Their actual whereabouts, however, remain a mystery.
MEXICO. An explosive device went off in the Xerox office in Guadalajara, causing considerable damage.   Three incendiary devices went off in the Guadalajara store of an American firm, causing $80,000 damage, the same night.
ISRAEL.  Two Palestinian guerrillas identified as Al Fatah members entered the town of Rihaniya, where they entered a house, shot an Israeli Moslem to death, and wounded his wife.  The attackers then surrendered to Israeli forces.  The guerrillas apparently believed that they had entered a Jewish village and were searching for hostages to exchange for five imprisoned terrorists in Israel.
ISRAEL.  Palestinian guerrillas raided the Rosh Hanikra kibbutz and wounded two Israelis.  One terrorist was killed.  The PLO claimed responsibility for the attack.
ISRAEL.  A man hurled hand grenades into a movie theater audience in Tel Aviv, killing two people, including himself, and wounding 54.  The PFLP claimed responsibility.  The terrorist was a Ghana-born holder of a British passport who had lived in Turkey.
FRANCE.  A bomb exploded at the Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company, shattering windows.  Members of the Youth Action Group claimed responsibility.
ISRAEL.  A bomb explosion injured 13 persons in central Jerusalem. The bomb exploded on Ben Yehuda Street, an avenue of cafes, shops, and offices, just after lunchtime when the street was crowded with shoppers.  The PDFLP claimed credit for the blast.
LEBANON.  An Air India B0747 flying 155 passengers on the Bombay-Beirut-Rome-New York run was hijacked out of Beirut by Josef Homolov, a Czechoslovak-born Canadian who entered the cockpit and flashed a pocketknife.  While holding a flashlight over the pilot's head, he demanded a gun and passage to a place of his choice.  During the two hour seige, he attempted to force the pilot to put the plane into a sharp dive over the center of Rome.  At this point the hijacker was overpowered by members of the crew.  He was arrested by Italian authorities after landing in Rome.
FRANCE.  The Baader Solidarity Group, Holger Meins Brigade and Ulrike Meinhof Commando claimed credit for attacking the Mercedes branch in Paris, near the Etoile.
ETHIOPIA.  Three bombs were thrown into the USIS library in Asmara. The explosion resulted in minor damage but no injuries.
LEBANON.  In a 1978 press conference, a spokesman for ASALA claimed that the January 1975 bombing of the Beirut offices of the World Council of Churches was the group's first operation.
UNITED STATES.  A Los Angeles bookstore, UNIDOS, was bombed by the Cuban Action Commandos.
UNITED STATES.  The Town and Campus Banquet Hall on U.S. 1 near Elizabeth, New Jersey, was bombed by Omega-7.
ARGENTINA.  Bombs in Rosario damaged the First National Bank of New York and the Boston Bank.
ARGENTINA.  A bomb damaged the German Roemer Laboratories in Rosario.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  Two armed men and a woman kidnapped Peter Lorenz, the Christian Democratic Union Party candidate for mayor.  The trio ambushed Lorenz's chauffeur-driven car as he was en route to his office in Berlin.  A truck suddenly blocked the path of the car as it approached an intersection.  A woman in another car rammed the limousine from the rear, and another car drove up to block an escape route from the side.  Lorenz's driver, who jumped from the car, was thrown to the pavement and beaten unconscious.  The female kidnapper was later identified as a fugitive anarchist linked to the Baader-Meinhof band of urban guerrillas.  The Movement of June 2 claimed responsibility for the kidnapping.  The kidnappers freed Peter Lorenz on March 4 after government authorities released five convicted anarchists from West German prisons and flew them, plus a hostage, out of Frankfurt airport for an unknown destination.  A sixth prisoner whose release was requested, refused to join the group.  The prisoners were also given $50,000.  Other demands met by the government included the release of two persons jailed for their role in violent demonstrations in November 1974 after the death of an imprisoned urban guerrilla leader.  Three members of the terrorist band were arrested by authorities six months later.  They were identified as members of the inner circle of the Movement of June 2.  The Lufthansa jet carrying the prisoners and hostage landed March 3 in Aden, Southern Yemen.  After the Aden government granted amnesty to the five, the hostage flew back to West Berlin on March 4 and appeared on television to read a statement from the anarchists.  The note said the South Yemen Foreign Ministry had assured the anarchists the right to stay in full freedom and without limitation in Aden.  The statement also contained an apparent code signaling that the kidnappers were safe and that Lorenz should be released.  Lorenz was released on March 4.ADDINFO:  This episode has been included as an act of international terrorism because the sovereignty of West Berlin still resides in the occupying powers, not West Germany.
On March 5, two boats filled with 8 Palestinian militants landed on the coast of Israel, proceeded on foot to Tel Aviv, and stormed the Savoy Hotel. The original target of the attack was reportedly the Tel Aviv Municipality Youth Center. However, the militants encountered several policemen on their way to the Youth Center. While fleeing the policemen, the militants climbed over an embankment, to the road, and seized the Savoy Hotel, the only lighted building on the street.  The militants took the guests and employees hostage and reportedly demanded a plane to Syria with which to leave with their hostages. They also demanded that the French, Greek, Vatican, or UN ambassador be brought in as a guarantor of the deal and had pamphlets demanding the release of ten prisoners, including the Greek Catholic Archbishop of Jerusalem, Most Rev. Hillarion Capucci, in jail for arms smuggling. They later reduced their demand to safe passage for themselves. On the morning of March 6, Israeli troops stormed the Hotel and ended the stand-off. Eighteen people; eight civilian hostages, three Israeli soldiers, and seven gunmen were killed in the attack. Two of the police officers killed were killed as the militants entered the hotel. At least twelve people; six civilians and six soldiers, were injured in the attack. The attack occurred on the eve of a visit by Secretary of State Henry Kissinger to the Middle East to assist in peace negotiations.  Al-Fatah claimed responsibility for the attack.  They stated that the attack was intended to serve as notice to the Israeli government and Secretary of State Henry Kissinger that there could be no Middle East peace settlement with the Palestinians. Some Fatah militants were saying that the attack originated in Egypt, not Lebanon, though sources reported that this was an attempt to undermine Anwar Sadats government (which they were distrustful of) in the upcoming Kissinger meetings. The statement claiming responsibility also reported that the commandos had blown themselves up when they ran out of ammunition. It was unclear if this was true.  On March 6, officials reported that they had captured the ship (which was carrying the two small boats) used to drop off the militants. It is believed the terrorists began their trip in Lebanon.
TURKEY.  A packet of explosives was hurled into the garden of the U.S. Consulate in Istanbul, only partially exploding.  No damage was caused.  The Mahir Cayan Suicide Group claimed responsibility.
UNITED STATES.  The Costa Rican Consulate in Los Angeles was bombed by the Cuban Action Commandos.
MEXICO.  Fire was set to the U.S. consulate in Guadalajara, causing no major damage to USIS premises.
FRANCE.  In a letter to Reuters, the Charles Martel Group claimed credit for planting a bomb that exploded in a car outside the Algerian consulate in Paris.  The group was protesting the French president's visit to Algeria.
JAPAN.  A bomb exploded in the Tokyo building housing the South Korean Industrial and Economic Research Institute.  Threatening letters were found in the company's mail box.  Extremists, believed to be members of the South Korea Youth League, or possibly the Anti-Japan Armed Front of East Asia, were arrested.
FRANCE.  The Warriors of Christ the King, a rightist group allegedly composed of Spanish police, were suspected of attacking ETA targets in the south.  In Biarritz, three men attempted to place a bomb in the car of Jose Antonio Urruticoechea, a suspected ETA member named as one of the fifteen persons wanted by the Spanish government for the Carrero Blanco murder.  One of the trio died when the bomb exploded prematurely.  Another was wounded.
FRANCE.  A bomb exploded in the Paris offices of IBM.  There were no damages.  A Spanish anarchist organization, the International Revolutionary Group (GARI), claimed responsibility for the attack.
ARGENTINA.  Police arrested three gunmen who sprayed machine-gun fire at the home of the U.S. ambassador, touching off a gun battle in which two persons were wounded.
IRAN.  Three terrorists shot and killed two U.S. Air Force officers in Tehran.  The officers were identified as Colonel Paul R. Shaffer, Jr. and Lieutentant Colonel John H. Turner.  Ten Marxist guerrillas were sentenced to death by firing squad on January 1, 1976.  An eleventh defendant, one of two women in the group, was sentenced to solitary confinement for 15 years.  These guerrillas also admitted to the 1973 slaying of Lieutenant Colonel Lewis Hopkins, financial comptroller of the U.S. Military Mission.
UNITED STATES.  An unidentified Cuban exile group bombed the Mexican Consulate in New York City.
ITALY.  Firebombs were thrown at three American companies only hours after President Ford ended his visit to Rome.  The Bank of America and Italy, the Goodyear Tire Company and an ITT subsidiary were attacked.
FRANCE.  A bomb exploded in a high school in Hasparen. Spanish authorities suspected that the school had been the site of a recent assembly of the ETA.  Damage was slight.
GUATEMALA.  Shots were fired from a passing car into the U.S. embassy in Guatemala City.  There were no injuries and slight property damage.
FRANCE.  A special French police captain, two members of his squad, and Michael Moukarbel, a Lebanese guerrilla who was under arrest, were killed in the Latin Quarter near the Sorbonne in Paris by a man called Carlos. Mr.  Moukarbel had been arrested for taking part in the bazooka attack at Orly Airport last January.  The search for Carlos led to inquiries in 10 countries.  The incident gradually brought out a story of international terrorism and links among extremist groups of Palestinians, Germans, Japanese, Turks, and possibly others.  It served to connect a series of attacks and bombings in several countries over the last few years.  Speculation has it that Carlos, later identified as Ilich Ramirez Sanchez of Venezuela, might be the key to terrorist international, a group linking apparently separate terrorist causes in one grand conspiracy.  The evidence uncovered in Paris showed that there were ties of logistics, weapons, help in faking documents and finding refuge and probably exchange of information.
ETHIOPIA.  Kidnappers seized two Americans, Steven C.  Campbell and James J. Harrell, both civilian technicians, at the U.S.-run Kagnew military communications relay station in Asmara.  The two worked for Collins International Service Company, Richardson, Texas, a subsidiary of Rockwell Corporation.  The ELF claimed responsibility.  Conflicting reports have the abductors also as the Popular Liberation Front, another Eritrean independence group, whose goal is Eritrean secession from Ethiopia.  The Eritrean rebels demanded from the U.S. government:  halt arms supplies to Ethiopia's military regime and close U.S.  communication bases there; compensation for areas of Eritrea that suffered heavy damage in attacks by the U.S.-equipped Ethiopian Air Force planes during fighting between rebels and Ethiopian government forces; U.S.  government pressure on Ethiopia's military government to free all Eritrean rebels it holds in prisons. The ELF sought no ransom.  The demands were not made until September 12 when two more Americans were captured.  The first two men were released on May 3, 1976, unharmed.
FRANCE.  The Paris and Roubaix offices of the Amicale des Algeriens en Europe were bombed.
MALAYSIA.  A group of five terrorists claiming to be members of the Japanese Red Army seized the U.S. consulate and a Swedish diplomat in the American International Assurance Building in Kuala Lumpur.  A guard and two policemen were shot and wounded by the gunmen after they seized the U.S.  consul, Robert Stebbins, and three Malaysian employees.  Swedish charge d'affaires Frederick Bergenstrahle and his secretary were also seized.  Seizure of the consular section of the U.S.  embassy in downtown Kuala Lumpur resulted in an original capture of 53 hostages, then a smaller group of 15 hostages being held captive for 79 hours.  The hostages were released August 7 after Japan had met the demands:  In return for the hostages, the gunmen forced Japan to agree to releasing seven Red Army comrades from prison.  Two of the seven preferred to remain in Japan, but the other five were flown to Kuala Lumpur and then went on with the gunmen to Libya.  Also aboard were a Japanese crew of nine and four government officials--two Malaysians and two Japanese--presented as hostages in exchange for those seized during the embassy occupation.  As a financial footnote in siege operations, Japan Airlines stated that the cost of the Boeing and crew to take the Red Army men to Libya was $618,000.  The terrorists gave themselves up to Libyan officials.ADDINFO FF:  August 4, 52 hostages.  The guerrillas freed the hostages in exchange for release of 5 other Red Army men imprisoned in Japan. They had stormed 12 story bldg, making their way to American consulate on 9th floor.  Herded 52 hostages into separate rooms and threatened to kill them unless prisoners were released and safe passage to Mid-East.  Hostages included Swedish charge d'affaires Frederik Bergenstrahle, four Australians, one Japanese, some Singaporeans, and indeterminate number of Malaysians.  Japanese Premier Takeo Miki, who was in Washington, acceded to demands.  Gunmen released 9 hostages on Aug.  6 and later freed 38 more, leaving Stebbins, Bergenstrable, two Americans, a Japanese, two Singaporeans, and 8 Malaysians.  All 15 taken to Kuala Lumpur airport, where they boarded a Japanese airliner, with five other Red Army men.  After further negotiations, 15 hostages were set free August 7 in exchange for substitute hostages, two Japanese and two Malaysian government officials.  Ten countries were solicited for asylum and most refused permission to land.  Negotiations stalled at the airport over Red Army demands to carry explosives with them and that their route to Libya be over water to bypass Israel, but the terrorists finally gave up the bombs, although they were allowed to keep their guns.  The plane finally landed in Tripoli.  Red Army gunmen expressed solidarity with Palestinian movement and with new Communist governments of South Vietnam and Cambodia.
COLOMBIA.  Donald E. Cooper, vice president for merchandising for the Sears, Roebuck department stores in Colombia, was kidnapped from his Bogota home by five men and one woman.  Wounded in the ambush were two household employees.  No ransom was demanded.  Mr. Cooper's kidnapping marked the first time that a U.S. citizen had been the direct target of an abduction in Colombia.  A number of wealthy Colombians and occasionally foreigners have been kidnapped by guerrillas over the years, but not U.S.  citizens.  Colombia authorities believed that left-wing guerrillas were involved.  Cooper was released on November 2, 1975.ADDINFO:  The police said it was not known if the kidnappers were common criminals after money or urban guerrillas seeking to publicize their struggle against imperialism.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  A bomb placed by the Soldiers of the Algerian Opposition was found and defused in the Algerian embassy in Bonn.  This group claimed credit for the bomb.
ETHIOPIA.  Two Americans under contract for the Navy, were killed by an ELF land mine while on their way to the U.S. transmitter facility near Asmara.
PHILIPPINES.  Two U.S. employees of Boise-Cascade were abducted from a timber concession near Zamboanga by Muslim dissidents.  They were released less than 24 hours later.
ETHIOPIA.  Two American enlisted men (Thomas C. Bowidowicz, Technician 3 of the Navy, and David Strickland, Specialist 5 of the Army) and six Ethiopians were kidnapped from the American communications center in Asmara by ELF guerrillas.  The revolutionary council claimed responsibility for the attack.  The attack was believed to have been planned to coincide with the Ethiopian government celebration of the anniversary of the overthrow of former Emperor Haile Selassi and the 13th anniversary of the integration of Eritrea into Ethiopia.  The servicemen were released in Sudan on January 9, 1976, in good condition.  The State Department said no ransom had been paid nor concessions made, but refused to discuss the details of the release while other Americans were being held.ADDINFO:  Spokesman for the ELF in Beirut demanded through the press that the United States cease all military aid to the Government of Ethiopia, close the communication facility near Asmara, dismantle an Ethiopian naval base under construction at Massawa, pay compensation for damage done to Eritrean villages by the U.S.-equipped Ethiopian Air Force, and exert pressure on the Ethiopian government to free all Eritrean rebels it holds in prisons.  Deadline was set for October 3.
SPAIN.  Five armed Arab terrorists forced their way into the Egyptian embassy in Madrid, threatening to blow it up and kill the ambassador and two aides.  The guerrillas demanded that Egypt refrain from signing implementation documents for the interim accord with Israel; that it issue a public declaration by officials attending the implementation conference in Geneva that the agreement signed September 4 was a betrayal of the Egyptian and Arab peoples; and that the Egyptians leave the Geneva meeting.  Speculation was that the PLFP may have been involved.  The ambassadors to Algeria and Iraq volunteered to serve as hostages along with three Egyptians.  The terrorists, their three Egyptian hostages, and the Iraqi and Algerian ambassadors were driven to the airport on September 16 where they boarded a four- engine, Soviet-made plane for flight to Algeria.  The guerrillas released the hostages in Algeria and surrendered to Algerian authorities, who turned them over to the PLO representative.ADDINFO FF:  Guerrillas threatened to blow up Egyptian embassy with Ambassador Mahmoud Abdul Ghaffar and his two aides unless Cairo renounced Sinai pact with Israel.  Dropping their demands after l6 hr siege, the Palestinians were flown to Algiers Sept. 16 along with Ghaffar, his aides and two other hostages.  The gunmen were turned over to a representative of the PLO.  The hostages were set free. Negotiations leading to Palestinian decision to leave embassy and fly to Algiers were conducted by ambassadors to Iraq, Algeria, Kuwait, and Jordan.  The PLO later dissociated itself from incident.  The Egyptian ambassador to Lebanon Ahmed Lufti Mitwalli, issued message to PLO leader Yasir Arafat holding him and all Palestinians responsible for the outcome of events in Madrid.  A spokesman for extreme left Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine stated on Sept.  15 that the embassy raid was a reaction to the treacherous policies of President Anwar Sadat and to the surrender pol
ARGENTINA.  A bomb exploded in the Cordoba offices of Xerox Argentina.
TURKEY.  A stick of dynamite was thrown into the garden of the Ankara residence of the Spanish ambassador.
IRELAND.  A splinter group of the military Provisional wing of the IRA kidnapped a Dutch businessman, Tiede Herrema.  The kidnapped man was managing director of a branch of the Dutch Ferenka Company in Limerick.  The terrorists threatened to kill him unless Ireland freed three top Irish Republican Army prisoners.  Among the three prisoners the terrorists wanted released was Brigitte Rose Dugdale, British heiress turned revolutionary.  In addition to the release of Miss Dugdale, the kidnappers demanded freedom for IRA provisional terrorists Kevin Malin and Jim Hyland.  After being held prisoner by the Irish terrorists for 36 days, Tiede Herrema was released unharmed on November 8.  The two IRA members surrendered to Irish police.ADDINFO:  Until Herrema's release, negotiations with the kidnappers were carried out by Chief Superintendent Lawrence Wrenn, head of the security division of the Irish police force, who provided food and changes of clothing for all three persons.  Police in Dublin announced that they were holding Brian McGowan and John Vincent Walsh in connection with the kidnapping.
ARGENTINA.  Ten armed refugees, nine of them Chileans, one Brazilian living in Argentina, occupied the offices of the United Nations High Commission for Refugees in Buenos Aires, and held 14 employees hostage.  The refugees, two women and eight men, demanded to be taken to a new homeland because of their poor living conditions in Argentina.  The Argentine government agreed to give the captors safe passage out of the country.  By night fall, eight women who had been held were freed before a final settlement was reached.  The six remaining hostages, including Robert Mueller, a Swiss who headed the UN High Commission for Refugees office, and nationals of Argentina, Chile, and Austria, were freed on October 10, 1975, after the group of refugees were flown out of Argentina for asylum in Algeria, the only country that would accept them.  They took along seven members of their families for whom they had also demanded safe passage out of the country.
UNITED KINGDOM.  A bomb hidden in a bag exploded at a Central London bus stop, killing one man waiting for a bus, injuring 20 other people. The blast was blamed on the IRA.
ARGENTINA.  An Italian executive and his bodyguard were shot to death by unidentified terrorists.  No one claimed responsibility for this act.
AUSTRIA.  Three armed men stormed into the Turkish embassy in Vienna and killed the ambassador.  The envoy, Danis Tunaligil, was killed by a group calling itself The Armenian Liberation Army. The ambassador was killed with British- and Israeli-made submachineguns.  The gunmen escaped; Austrian police arrested a number of suspects, later released.  Their action appeared to be political according to an embassy official, but it was never ascertained if the killers were of Greek or Turkish origin.
LEBANON.  Two Scandinavian diplomats and a French diplomat were kidnapped in a raid on a popular hotel in central Beirut after gunmen shot their way into their rooms.  They were later released unharmed after intervention by the PLO.
LEBANON.  Michael Ross, an American newsman with United Press International, was detained for more than an hour by gunmen from the Ain El Mreisse quarter of Beirut near the U.S. embassy.
LEBANON.  Officials of the French embassy were pinned down in their compound on Rue Clemenceau in Beirut by gunfire.
TURKEY.  Two Molotov cocktails exploded in the Istanbul garden of the Iranian consulate.  There were no injuries reported.  A dynamite bomb exploded in front of the Turkish-Iranian Friendship Society in Istanbul. Police speculated the attacks were to protest the visit of the Shah of Iran.
PHILIPPINES.  Six Japanese nationals were kidnapped from their fishing vessel off Basilan Island by ten armed men.  All of the Japanese were released on December 6 after a settlement was reached between the Philippine government and the kidnappers, who probably were Moslem rebels.
ISRAEL.  Golan Heights.  Three members of the DFLP broke into a school dormitory at Ramat Magshimim, lined students against the wall, and began shooting them in the back.  The students were also army sergeants. A survivor fled to warn others on the farming settlement.  The terrorists, armed with submachine guns and hatchets, killed three and wounded another before escaping into Syria.
UNITED STATES.  Cuban Power 76, another name for the Frente de Liberacion Nacional Cubana (FLNC), was responsible for the planting of a time bomb found on board a Bahamassair flight at Miami International Airport. The bomb was strong enough to have killed everyone on board had it exploded midflight.
THE NETHERLANDS.  Seven armed extremists, calling themselves the Free South Moluccan Youths and demanding independence for the Indonesian Island of South Molucca, seized a passenger train near Beilen in Northern Netherlands, killing at least three men and taking about 64 hostages.  Twenty-six of the original 64 hostages either escaped or were released, leaving a total of 38 hostages on the Beilen train. The terrorists demanded a bus to take them to Schiphol airport near Amsterdam, and a plane to fly them to an unknown destination.  Later, in another note, they demanded the release of five Moluccans held in Dutch prisons on charges of terrorist actions, and Dutch recognition of what they called their government in exile. An explosion aboard the hijacked train injured one of the attackers and slightly wounded a passenger hostage.  The young Asian terrorists surrendered to police on December 14, releasing the remaining hostages after a 12-day siege of the train.  The terrorists were tried and sentenced to 14 years in prison.ADDINFO FF:  In the first incident, 7 armed S.  Moluccans Dec.  2 seized a train bound for Amsterdam near Beilin, killed two people and held 50 hostages.
UNITED STATES.  The Miami office of the FBI was bombed, along with those of a Social Security office, a State unemployment office, two post offices, a bank, a state attorney's office, and the Miami Police Department Headquarters.  Rolando Otero, a former member of Brigade 2506, was accused of the bombings.
UNITED STATES.  The Miami office of the FBI was bombed, along with those of a Social Security office, a State unemployment office, two post offices, a bank, a state attorney's office, and the Miami Police Department Headquarters.  Rolando Otero, a former member of Brigade 2506, was accused of the bombings.
FRANCE.  The Portuguese embassy in Paris was bombed.  There were no injuries.  A rightist organization, the Portuguese Liberation Army, claimed credit for the episode.
COLOMBIA.  A bomb consisting of two sticks of dynamite with a timing mechanism exploded in a store of a US firm in the Bogota neighborhood of Chapinero causing $2,000 damage.
GREECE.  Richard Welch, special assistant to the U.S.  ambassador in Athens, was assassinated by three unidentified assailants.  A leftist group calling itself the Revolutionary Organization of November 17 claimed credit.  The EOKA-B have been tenuously linked to the assassination.
UNITED STATES.  A bomb exploded in a baggage locker in a Delta, Eastern and TWA claims area of New York City's La Guardia Airport, killing eleven and injuring seventy five.  Damage was estimated at $750,000.  A caller said a commando attack squad of the PLO had carried the armed struggle into the U.S. and threatened more attacks.  Another caller warned that two more bombs had been planted, but this turned out to be a hoax.  A Puerto Rican group claimed responsibility for the blast.  The next day, the PLO denounced the blast, which police said was equal to twenty to twenty-five sticks of dynamite.
LEBANON.  A sudden explosion aboard a Middle East Airlines 720 flying from Beirut to Dubai and Oman caused the plane to crash into the Saudi Arabian desert, killing all eighty-two on board.  The explosion took place in the forward baggage compartment as the plane was flying above Saudi and Kuwait.
LEBANON.  The U.S. embassy in Beirut came under heavy sniper fire, although no one was injured.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  A bomb was thrown onto the terrace of the Yugoslav consulate in Dortmund causing minor damage.  Although no one claimed credit for the bombing, Yugoslav exiles have been responsible for similar bombings in the past.
PORTUGAL.  The Anti-Communist Action Front claimed credit for the explosion nearby the Russian vessel Nadya Ribakovatye. Two bombs were thrown at the ship, one exploded in the water alongside, another damaged a nearby swing bridge.  The ship was not damaged but left the port of Oporto without taking on any cargo.  The attack was believed to be directed against communists in the port administration.
KENYA.  Three Palestinian terrorists, apparently members of the PFLP, were arrested by authorities at Nairobi's Embakasi International Airport before they could fire their SAM-7 heat-seeking missiles at an EL AL plane scheduled to stop over during its flight from Johannesburg, South Africa, to Tel Aviv.  Some reports claim that the machine guns, grenades, pistols and SAM-7s were provided by Idi Amin of neighboring Uganda.  A few days later, West Germans connected with the Baader-Meinhof Gang were sent to find out what had happened to their colleagues but were also arrested, apparently as a result of a tip by Israeli intelligence to the Kenya Security Service.  The female German had instructions written on her stomach in invisible ink ordering the terrorists to carry out their attack.  The release of the terrorists was demanded by a PFLP group that hijacked an Air France plane to Entebbe, Uganda on June 27, 1976.  The Palestinians were held in Israeli jails until February 1980 when they were sentenced to 18-year prison terms.  Two West Germans arrested with the Arabs were sentenced in September 1980 to 10-year prison terms.
FRANCE.  The Iran Air office on the Avenue des Champs Elysees in Paris was attacked.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  A bomb exploded at an Israeli business office in West Berlin, causing extensive property damage but no personal injuries.  A note was found at the building stating that the Arm of the Arab Revolution was responsible.
BAHAMAS.  The Soviet ship Dzhordano Bruno, while anchored five miles from the British-owned Anguilla Cays island of Cay Salbank, was attacked by gunfire from a small boat.  No one was injured.  Anti-Castro Cuban exiles have previously attacked Soviet ships and may have been responsible.
VENEZUELA.  Two bombs were placed outside the El Marques stores of a U.S. firm in the evening.  Only one of them exploded, causing minor damage.
FRANCE.  The Unified Liberation Front of New Algeria claimed credit for bombing the Algerian government tourist office in central Paris.
UNITED STATES.  Several shots were fired at the Soviet residential complex in New York.  Only minor damage was sustained, and there were no personal injuries.  A caller claiming to represent the Jewish Armed Resistance claimed credit for the shooting and threatened that Soviet diplomats would be kidnapped unless a Soviet Jewish teenager was allowed to emigrate to Israel.  Five Jewish Defense League members were arrested and later tried for this incident.  On 16 December, four of the group were sentenced to prison terms of up to 6 years and the fifth received a suspended sentence.
FRANCE.  Shots from automatic weapons were fired at the windows of an Aeroflot office in Paris, causing considerable damage but no injuries.
LAOS.  Two grenades exploded on the grounds of the Soviet embassy in Vientiane, injuring two men and two women, all Soviet citizens.
ARGENTINA.  Two security guards of a Ford executive were killed by machine-gun fire from a speeding car.
TURKEY.  A bomb exploded outside the office of Philips Electronics in Ankara.
UNITED STATES.  Two shots were fired into the Soviet mission to the United Nations in New York.  No one was injured.  The Jewish Armed Resistance claimed credit for the attack.
UNITED STATES.  A bomb exploded at the front door of the Cuban Mission to the United Nations in New York City.  Associated Press and ABC News received anonymous telephone calls from a person who said the bombing was part of a plan code-named Omega-7, to hit Communists everywhere.
ANGOLA.  Two Roman Catholic missionaries, a Dutchman and a Portuguese, were killed by a uniformed man who fired on them with a machine gun.
UNITED STATES.  Ramon Donestevez, a liberal who had negotiated the release of Cuban political prisoners, was assassinated by unknown gunmen.
UNITED STATES.  The Miami, Florida, home of Vicente Dopico, a Cuban exile who had collaborated in a publication favoring coexistence with the Castro regime, was bombed by the Sons of Giron Movement.
ITALY .  The Armed Communist Formation claimed credit for severely wounding the Italian president of Chevron Oil Italiano in Rome.  Chevron is a subsidiary of Standard Oil of California.
VENEZUELA.  An incendiary bomb was found in the Maracaibo store of a U.S. firm.
FRANCE.  The Front International Revolutionnaire, an anti-Zionist group, claimed responsibility for bombing a Rothschild bank branch in Paris.
CHILE.  Shots were fired at the U.S. ambassador's residence from a car with three occupants.  There were no injuries or damage.
UNITED STATES.  Pipe bombs exploded in New York at the Four Continents Bookstore, a Soviet publication outlet, two banks, the Communist Party headquarters, and a site near the United Nations library.  An anonymous caller to the Daily News claimed the Jewish Armed Resistance Strike Unit planted the bomb to protest Soviet treatment of Jewish people.
ARGENTINA.  An Italian executive of the Fiat automobile company in Buenos Aires was assassinated by terrorists.
FRANCE.  The West German firm of Kocker and Thyussen was bombed in Paris.
ITALY.  A German Academy Building in Rome was bombed, possibly in response to the suicide of anarchist Ulrike Meinhof.
ITALY.  A German restaurant in Rome was the victim of attempted arson.Possibly in response to the death of Ulrike Meinhof.
ITALY.  The FRG Consulate in Venice was firebombed.
LEBANON.  Edouard Saab, editor of the French language daily L'Orient le Jour  and reporter for Le Monde, was killed by a sniper's bullet while driving across a line dividing Christian and Moslem sectors of Beirut.  The writer was a passenger in a car driven by Henry Tanner of the New York Times, who was slightly injured.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  Firebombs were thrown at the Turkish consulates in Cologne, Essen and Frankfurt.
BELGIUM.  Molotov cocktails were thrown at the West German Consulate in Brussels.
ISRAEL.  Two people were killed and nine injured as a result of an explosion at the Tel Aviv airport.  The PFLP claimed credit for the bombing.
SWITZERLAND.  The Turkish Consulate was devastated by a bomb.  Armenian extremists were presumed responsible.
CUBA.  Cuban exiles shelled a Soviet ship off the coast of Cuba.
KUWAIT.  The Syrian airline office in Kuwait was destroyed by a bomb. There were no injuries.  A Palestinian with a Syrian passport was arrested, according to press reports.  The bombing occurred one day after Palestinian organizations and resistance groups met in Kuwait and sent a cable to Arafat urging him to retaliate for the Phalangist and Syrian atrocities at the refugee camps in Lebanon.  A Palestinian was arrested and sentenced on August 9, 1976, by the Kuwait Criminal Court to two years imprisonment, followed by deportation from Kuwait.
UNITED STATES.  A bomb exploded at the front door of the Cuban mission to the United Nations in New York.  Associated received anonymous telephone calls from a person who said the bombing was part of a plan code named Omega 7 to hit Communists everywhere.
ETHIOPIA.  The Italian vice consul and a companion were kidnapped.  They were released on 26 June by Eritrean insurgents without any demands having been made.
UNITED STATES.  Two Molotov cocktails were thrown from a car at the South African embassy causing no injuries.
GREECE.  Four members of the PFLP hijacked an Air France jetliner with 258 persons aboard shortly after it took off from Athens, and ordered it to fly to Benghazi, Libya.  There it was refueled and then flown to Entebbe, Uganda.  Six additional terrorists joined the mission in Uganda.  Between June 30 and July 1 a total of 149 non-Jewish passengers were freed in Uganda after Israel agreed to negotiate the release of extremists it held. The extremists demanded the release of 53 jailed freedom fighters in Israel, Kenya, and Europe, in exchange for the 258 hostages.  On July 4, an Israeli airborne commando raid rescued the remaining 109 Jewish and Israeli hostages in Uganda, surprising the ten hijackers (seven of whom were killed, three escaped).  At least 20 Uganda soldiers were also killed; three civilian hostages were killed in the brief gun battle at the airport.  An Israeli commando officer was also killed.  Eight other persons were wounded.  A British woman sent to the hospital in Kampala when she became ill disappeared after the rescue and is presumed dead.In July 1981, the airline agreed to compensate the Israelis who were held captive there.  Air France will pay almost $2 million, to be distributed among the 67 plaintiffs, made up of former hostages and the heirs of four civilians who were killed when the Israeli commandos stormed the Entebbe airport.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  An unidentified person attempted to assassinate the Yugoslav vice consul as he was entering his office building in Dusseldorf.  The vice consul was not injured.  Yugoslav emigres, usually Croatians, have assassinated other Yugoslav diplomats in the past.  Two Croatian nationalists were sentenced on November 10, 1977, for the attempted murder.  Gunman Marko Krpan, 26, was sentenced to 12 years, and Pavle Perovic, 25, who drove the getaway car, for 10-1/2 years.
JAMAICA.  An explosion occurred in a piece of luggage intended for a Cubana Airlines plane in Kingston, destroying the luggage cart.  There were no injuries.  Cuban exiles are believed responsible.
FRANCE.  The Avengers, a group of World War ll Resistance fighters, claimed credit for burning the home of ex-Waffen S.S.  Colonel Joachim Peiper, who was killed in the blaze.  Peiper had been condemned to death for ordering the execution of seventy-one U.S. prisoners of war during the Battle of the Bulge.  The death sentence was commuted to life imprisonment, but he was released in 1957.
ISRAEL.  A bomb exploded on a bus near Tel Aviv injuring 11 persons. Three Arabs who were injured by the explosion in the Tel Aviv suburb of Ramat Gan were among the suspects.  The bombing was the first since the Israeli raid to rescue more than 100 hijacked hostages in Uganda, which brought threats of reprisals from Arab guerrillas.
PORTUGAL.  A bomb destroyed a large section of DETA, the Mozambican airlines, in Lisbon but caused no injuries.
ITALY.  A bomb exploded at the Argentine embassy in Rome, knocking out several windows and the front door.  A group calling itself the International Che Guevara Organization claimed credit for the bombing.
COLOMBIA.  A bomb exploded at the Chilean pavilion at the Bogota International Trade Fair, injuring six and causing considerable damage. The Pedro Leon Arboleda commando of the EPL (Popular Liberation Army) claimed responsibility.  This was one of several bombings which occurred at the Trade Fair and the group referred to the attacks as part of Operation Tigre de Papel (Paper Tiger).
FRANCE.  A bomb exploded outside a Greek travel agency, shattering windows in the building.  There were no injuries in either incident.  It was believed the bombing was a protest against the arrest in Greece of German terrorist Rolf Pohle.
ISRAEL.  Two French tourists were injured when a booby-trapped package lying on the sidewalk exploded on a Jerusalem sidewalk.
EL SALVADOR.  Unidentified gunmen attacked the residence of the Nicaraguan ambassador.  One policeman was killed and another wounded in the attack. The motive for the attack is unknown.
EGYPT.  Mohammed Ali Haitham, a former premier of South Yemen, was slightly wounded and his driver was killed in an assassination attempt in Cairo.
ARGENTINA.  CORU claimed credit for kidnapping and murdering two officials with the Cuban Embassy in Buenos Aires.  CORU was suspected of having the assistance of the Chilean DINA on this operation.
EL SALVADOR.  A policeman guarding the Nicaraguan ambassador's residence was shot to death.  The attackers were believed to have been guerrilla commandos.
PANAMA.  A bomb caused considerable damage to Cubana's check-in desk at Belisario Porras International Airport.  Fifteen minutes later a second bomb exploded at the downtown office of Cubana.  The Anti-Castro Command claimed responsibility for the two blasts.  There were no injuries.
AUSTRIA.  A homemade firebomb was removed from a staff car parked in front of the U.S. embassy in Vienna.
ARGENTINA.  Three people were injured in separate incidents when bombs hidden in flowers and other gift packages exploded in Buenos Aires.  One of the victims was associated with the Renault automobile company, another with IBM, and a third with a Ford subsidiary.  The Montoneros later claimed responsibility for sending the bombs.
TRINIDAD.  A bomb exploded in front of the Guyanese consulate general in Port of Spain, injuring three people and causing extensive damage.  CORU claimed it placed the bomb to retaliate against Guyana for allowing Cuban troops and aircraft to stop in Guyana en route to Angola.
ARGENTINA.  An Argentine executive of the Chrysler factory in Buenos Aires was assassinated in front of his home.  The Montoneros claimed responsibility.  This assassination followed the firing of 121 workers accused by Chrysler and Ford of promoting work stoppages and slowdowns.
UNITED STATES.  Five self-styled fighters for free Croatia hijacked a TWA jetliner with 87 persons abroad.  The New York to Chicago plane was diverted to Montreal, then on to Gander, Newfoundland, where 34 of the passengers were released, then on to Paris.  Their communiques were found along with a bomb in a New York train station locker.  The bomb later exploded when police tried to defuse it, killing one officer and wounding three others.  After the September 11 bomb explosion, the hijackers warned that another bomb would explode somewhere in the United States unless an English-language newspaper in Paris and four major American newspapers printed a manifesto demanding Croatian independence from Yugoslavia.  The 30-hour episode ended in Paris when the Croatian nationalists released the remaining 53 hostages unharmed and surrendered to French authorities.  The hijackers were returned to New York by French military transport to face air piracy and murder charges.  A press release in July 1977 disclosed that Croatian nationalist Zvonko Busic (the leader of the hijacking), and his wife Julienne were sentenced to life in prison in federal court in New York City.  Other accomplices were sentenced later.
ITALY.  Molotov cocktails were thrown at the office of Honeywell International in Rome.  Speculation was that the bombings were to mark the third anniversary of the military coup in Chile that resulted in the death of Salvador Allende.
ARGENTINA.  Guerrillas fired submachine guns and hand grenades against the house of an Argentine executive of the Ford Motor Company in Buenos Aires. The Montoneros claimed responsibility.
ARGENTINA.  Fire broke out in the U.S.  Chancery building in Buenos Aires. Damage was estimated at over $10,000.  Inspecting officials believe the fire was intentionally set.  There were no injuries reported.
ITALY.  A bomb damaged the Rome regional office of Westinghouse.
ITALY.  The Ghassan Kanafani Commandos set bombs at three branches of the Bank of America and Italy and inside a suburban office of the Avis car rental company.  The attacks were in protest of Syria's involvement in Lebanon.  The group's communique said, Death to Zionism.  Death to imperialism.
ITALY.  The Ghassan Kanafani Commandos threw molotov cocktails at the Roman office of the United Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society and outside a synagogue.
FRANCE.  Two bombs were detonated at Spanish facilities in France to commemorate the first anniversary of the execution of five Basque terrorists in Spain.  Hit were the Basque Pastor in central Paris and a Spanish consular office in suburban Saint Denis.  The blasts caused extensive property damage but no injuries.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  A Molotov cocktail was thrown through a window of the Syrian Arab Airlines office in Munich, resulting in minor damage.  Police believe the purpose was to protest Syria's recent actions against the Palestinians in Lebanon.
LEBANON.  Ali Hassan Salamah, believed to be the Black September planner of the Munich Olympics attack, was critically wounded when he was shot in the stomach as he walked a long a Beirut street.  The Israeli secret service was believed responsible.
PAKISTAN.  In an apparent campaign against Palestinian guerrillas in the Lebanese civil war in Islamabad, three Palestinians attacked the Syrian embassy and the ambassador's residence.  Unconfirmed reports said one of the raiders was killed and the other two were wounded in a gun battle with police.  The PLO denied any connection with the attack.
TURKEY.  A cleaning woman found a bomb on top of an air conditioner of the Pan Am office in Izmir.
LEBANON.  Three Greek vessels Eko, Riri, and Spiro were attacked at night by frogmen who placed limpet mines on the hulls of the vessels.  The attackers were believed to be members of a right wing Lebanese Christian Group.  All three vessels sank.
UNITED STATES.  Aldo Vera Serafin, former head of the secret police under Castro and a member of CORU and the Fourth Republic, two groups with ties with Orlando Bosch, was assassinated by unknown gunmen.
FRANCE.  An Iranian diplomat was shot and seriously wounded near his Paris residence by an unknown attacker on a motorcycle.  A second gunman wounded an off-duty policeman who tried to prevent the attack.  Both assailants escaped.  An anonymous caller told a French news agency that the Reza REZAI International Brigades was responsible for the shooting and had attacked the diplomat because he was a member of the Iranian state Security police.
TURKEY.  A bomb exploded in Istanbul at an Iranian business firm.  A group professing to be followers of the late Mahir Cayan, a Turkish anti-government terrorist killed in 1972, claimed responsibility.
COSTA RICA.  A bomb exploded outside the Guatemalan embassy in San Jose, causing little damage and no injuries.  The FSLN claimed responsibility.
GREECE.  A bomb exploded in the car of a USAF sergeant in Athens.  Two other bombs, placed at the USAF exchange annex and in a USAF vehicle, were discovered and deactivated.  The persons responsible are not known.
GREECE.  A bomb exploded in the car belonging to the Syrian embassy in Athens.
SYRIA.  Syrian Foreign Minister Abd-al-Halim Khaddam was shot and wounded in an assassination attempt in Damascus.  He was attacked while riding in his car and was hospitalized in good condition.  The Black June organization in a statement issued in Madrid claimed responsibility for the attack and said the operation was carried out to comply with instructions to liquidate Syrian officials.
MEXICO.  A Mexican employee at a Chrysler plant in Mexico City was shot by 23rd of September Communist League members when he attempted to stop them from distributing the League's pamphlets to plant workers.  This is the second incident in a week in which a Mexican employee of a U.S.-owned company was shot by members of the 23rd of September terrorist group.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  An arson fire in the noncommissioned officers' club of a U.S.  Army barracks in Bad Hersfeld during the night caused $1,040,000 damage but no injuries.
COSTA RICA.  Huber Matos, Jr., was wounded by two bullets as he walked toward his car in a parking lot near his San Jose restaurant.  Matos is the son of a former commander of Fidel Castro's forces, who had been jailed in Cuba for seventeen years.  Matos's mother, a New Jersey resident, requested State Department aid in arranging a prisoner exchange suggested by Chile in which her husband would be released for Jorge Montes, a prominent Chilean communist who was jailed after the 1973 coup.
BANGLADESH.  A hand grenade thrown from a passing vehicle exploded at the USIS building in Chittagong.  The detonation caused minor damage to the building and slightly injured one Bangladesh citizen.  The attack was one of several similar incidents in Chittagong the same evening.  It is not known who was responsible.
MEXICO.  Duraflex Corporation President Mitchell Andreski and a Mexican associate were shot and killed in a Mexico City suburb while inspecting a construction site in an area where a group of Mexicans were distributing Communist propaganda literature.  Members of the group killed the two men and wounded two other persons.  The attackers were said to be 23d of September Communist League members.
EL SALVADOR.  The Reverend Mario Bernal Londono, a Colombian Roman Catholic priest and a local parishioner were kidnapped by guerrillas in front of the Apopa church, seven miles outside San Salvador.  The parishioner was later released in San Salvador.
IRAQ.  A Syrian agent was arrested after placing a booby-trapped suitcase in a Karbala mosque.  The device was dismantled minutes before it was to explode.
PERU.  Two bombs exploded at the Lima home of the Cuban military attache, causing considerable damage but no injuries.  The persons responsible are not known.  The attache's home is located adjacent to the official residence of the Cuban ambassador to Peru.
TURKEY.  A bomb exploded outside the Iraqi embassy in Ankara causing only minor damage to the building.  According to a leaflet left at the scene, the attack was in memory of Arab patriots and Kurds..
ETHIOPIA.  Three Molotov cocktails were thrown at the USIS building in Addis Ababa.  The premises were unoccupied at the time except for local guards.  Two of the bombs, thrown from a moving car, fell short of the building.  The third struck an upper window but did not ignite. The persons responsible are not known.
UNITED STATES.  George de Mohrenschildt, a shadowy figure with connections to the Cuban exiles and Lee Harvey Oswald (John Kennedy's assassin), was found dead in his home, the victim of a fatal shotgun blast.  At the time, he was working on a biography of Oswald. (See related incident 4/5/77)
ZAIRE.  Glen J. R. Eschtruth, the head of the United Methodist Mission Hospital in Kapanga was kidnapped by rebels and later killed.
EGYPT.  The Libyan consulate in Alexandria was set on fire.  This came a day after demonstrators in Benghazi sacked the Egyptian embassy.
FRANCE.  Firebombs exploded at the France-USSR Association offices and at the Editions de Moscou publishing house in Paris.  The first blast resulted in only slight damage but the explosion at the publishing house caused extensive damage.  A group called the Action Front for the Liberation of the Baltic Countries claimed credit.
ISRAEL.  A bomb exploded on board a bus on its way to Beersheba, injuring twenty-eight and ripping out seats and smashing windows.  Arab passengers going to their jobs had left the bus ten minutes earlier and were suspected in the bombing.
MAURITANIA.  An unknown number of Polisario guerrillas attacked a Mauritanian mining facility near Zouerate with mortar and small arms fire.  Two French citizens were killed during the attack and six others were kidnapped by the raiding force. Facilities at the mining site were extensively damaged.
SPAIN.  A bomb explosion at the USIS Cultural Center in Madrid caused considerable damage to the building but no serious injuries.  The leftist group GRAPO claimed responsibility for the attack.
UNITED STATES.  A bomb exploded in the Fort Lauderdale, Florida, offices of Mackey International Airlines, causing minor damage but no injuries.  An anonymous caller to the UPI office in Miami claimed responsibility in the name of the Pedro Luis Boitel Commandos, a group named after a dead anti-Castro leader.  Following the attack, Mackey Airlines president Joseph Mackey announced cancellation of plans to resume regular flights to Cuba.
TURKEY.  A powerful bomb exploded in Istanbul's Yesilkoy airport, killing five persons and injuring 42.  One of the injured was a US. citizen.  Damage to the building was extensive.  A similar bomb exploded the same afternoon in the Sirkeci train station, causing one death, approximately 10 injuries, and heavily damaging the terminal building.  In an anonymous telephone call to the French press agency in Athens, a group calling itself the 28 May Armenian Organization claimed responsibility for the bombings.
UNITED STATES.  Three Croatian nationalists, armed with small caliber handguns, seized the offices of the Yugoslav mission to the UN, but surrendered after two hours.  The mission chauffeur was wounded in the takeover.  The motivation for the attack appears to have been publicity for the cause of independence for Croatia.  The three Croatians were indicted on 23 June on charges of attempted murder, attempted kidnapping, assault, burglary, and criminal possession of a weapon.  On October 13, 1977, the Croatians were convicted of charges of conspiracy to invade the Yugoslav Mission to the United Nations and seize Ambassador Jaksa Petric as a hostage in order to publicize a political cause.  In addition to the conspiracy charge, the jury found defendant Vladimir Dizdar, 23, of Chicago, guilty of shooting the mission employee, Radimir Medic, who was crippled as a result of the shooting.
CYPRUS.  Four Arabs driving a car with diplomatic plates attempted to kidnap George Atallah, a Palestinian who was living in Lebanon, and force him aboard a Middle East Airlines flight to Beirut.  Atallah, using crutches, had been admitted to a private Nicosia clinic with a leg injury and was released on June 16.  The local press claimed that he was a member of Fatah who had expressed interest in returning to his birthplace, Israel, where he had been arrested for anti-governmental activities.  The PLO was accused by the press of being behind the kidnapping attempt and of intending to place Atallah on trial and execute him.
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES.  A Gulf Air flight, which had originated in London, was hijacked en route from Dubai to Muscat, Oman, by a lone Lebanese man and forced to fly to Doha, Qatar.  The hijacker, armed with a pistol and hand grenades, demanded a $12,800 ransom for the release of the 64 persons aboard the aircraft and intervention by the Qatari government in the crisis in Lebanon.  He said he took over the plane to publicize the situation in south Lebanon, which he said is subjected every day to thousands of shells and savage, repeated aggressions. He was later persuaded to release the passengers and crew members.  Qatari troops then boarded the plane and overpowered the hijacker.
CHILE.  A LADECO airliner on a domestic flight from Arica to Santiago, Chile, was seized by four hijackers and forced to fly to Lima, Peru. Initial demands by the group included the release of two men imprisoned in Chile and onward travel to Caracas and Paris.  After three hours of negotiations with Peruvian authorities, the hijackers surrendered and were taken to the Venezuelan embassy in anticipation of being granted political asylum in Venezuela.  However, the Venezuelan government refused to accept the four, and on 9 July they were flown to Cuba after the Cuban government agreed to grant them asylum.
SPAIN.  A bomb exploded at the French Cultural Institute in Madrid causing extensive damage to the building and injuring two people.  The October Group of Anti-Fascist Resistance (GRAPO) claimed responsibility for placing the bomb.
GREECE.  A bomb which failed to explode was found in a storeroom and a second bomb, which had failed to explode, was found in a storeroom at the U.S. Armed Forces Post Exchange.  No injuries were reported in any of the incidents which were blamed on protestors against alleged U.S. support for the former military government and alleged U.S. tolerance of the Turkish invasion of Cyprus.
PERU.  A Cuban fishing boat, docked at a port near Lima, was bombed. All of the crew escaped unhurt, but the vessel was a total loss.  The International Commandos of Zone 6 of CORU claimed in a Puerto Rican newspaper to have carried out the attack with two magnetic explosive mines, but there is no evidence to support this claim.
ITALY.  A seven-pound dynamite bomb exploded in the Milan offices of the Swissair, causing minor damage.  A leftist group calling itself Combatants for Communism claimed responsibility, saying the attack was to protest the lengthy detention in Switzerland of an alleged West German anarchist, Petra Krause.
RHODESIA.  A bomb exploded in Woolworth's in Salisbury, killing eleven and injuring seventy-six, mostly black citizens.  The second floor of the store was destroyed by the blast, which knocked out a large section of the eight- inch thick outer wall.  The bomb was composed of seventy-five pounds of TNT and had been placed at a parcel check-in-site.  Rhodesian guerrillas were blamed and a suspect was arrested in October.
UNITED STATES.  A fire was set in front of the Yugoslav consulate in San Francisco during the early morning hours.  The front of the building was damaged in the blaze.  The persons responsible were not known.
ITALY.  A bomb exploded outside the Milan offices of the Italy-German Chamber of Commerce, injuring no one, in an apparent reprisal for the escape of Nazi war criminal Herbert Kappler.
COLOMBIA.  A bomb exploded in the Sears store in Cali, injuring three persons.  Two other bombings, both at local police stations, occurred the same day.  The persons responsible are not known.
CHILE.  A bomb was found at the Santiago Binational Center.  An extreme left group Resistencia Popular claimed responsibility.
MEXICO.  Bombs went off in a Sears Roebuck store, a General Motors assembly plant and at the headquarters of the Colgate Palmolive subsidiary.
AUSTRALIA.  The Indian High Commission's military attache was stabbed during an attempted kidnap attempt against him and his wife.  The attache was able to disarm his assailant who fled.  The attacker was apprehended later and claimed he was seeking the release of P.R. Sarkar, the Ananda Marga leader.
UNITED STATES.  Bombs exploded at four hotels in Miami and Miami Beach in the early morning hours.  Hit were the Fontainebleau and Eden Roc hotels in Miami Beach and the Sheraton Four Ambassadors and Dupont Plaza hotels in Miami.  Damage was minor and no one was injured.  A caller to the Associated Press office in Miami claimed responsibility for the bombings in the name of the Luis Boitel Commandos, an anti- Castro Cuban exile group.  This group is also responsible for the 7 September bombings in Washington, D.C., and two earlier attacks in Florida.
PANAMA.  Panama City university students set fire to the U.S. Ambassador's car while the charge d'affaires, who was using it, was visiting the campus.  No one was in the vehicle at the time of the incident.  The students, who prevented firemen from approaching the car, were protesting against the terms of the Panama Canal Treaty.
GREECE.  Three cars belonging to American military men were hit by firebombs.  The attacks were believed to be the work of small extremist groups trying to create tension in advance of national elections scheduled for November.
LEBANON.  An explosion damaged the First National Bank of Chicago in downtown Beirut.  No injuries were reported.  The Arab Communist Organization claimed reponsibility.  A statement found near the bank entrance demanded the release of a Lebanese under death sentence for the seizure of the Beirut branch of the Bank of America in October 1973.
ISRAEL.  The Arab Revolutionary Movement claimed responsibility for a bomb that went off during the morning in the old city of Jerusalem, slightly injuring two tourists.
ITALY.  Powerful explosives wrecked three showrooms for German-made automobiles in northern Italian cities.  Anonymous callers said the bombs were planted in memory of three West German anarchists whose deaths in prison caused riots in London and Athens as well as Italy and Germany.  The three were members of the Baader-Meinhof Gang, including leader Andreas Baader.
GREECE.  Armenian extremists claimed credit for planting a bomb that destroyed the car of Metin Yalma, the assistant press attache of the Turkish embassy in Athens.
FRANCE.  The Andreas Baader Commando group claimed credit for arson attacks against the West German consulate in Toulouse.
TURKEY.  Two bombs thrown at the West German cultural center caused several injuries and extensive damage.  The explosions occurred as about 40 young people, protesting the deaths of three German terrorist leaders, gathered in front of the center.  Two Turkish bus drivers, waiting to take school children home, were injured.
ITALY.  Bombs damaged three West German showrooms in Rome.
ITALY.  Leftist extremists, protesting Baader-Meinhof Gang deaths, threw Molotov cocktails at the Mercedes showrooms in Milan.  Several windows were broken and a small fire inside the building was quickly extinguished.
FRANCE.  A gasoline bomb was thrown at the Algerian consulate in Strasbourg.  There were no injuries or damage.  A caller to a local newspaper said the attack was in retaliation for Algerian support of the Polisario group, which was holding eight French citizens hostage.
ALGERIA.  The Algerian-backed Polisario Front guerrillas attacked a Spanish trawler with mortar and machine-gun fire, and seized three Spanish fishermen.  The guerrillas used a rocket-armed inflatable speedboat in the attack.  The guerrilla movement is fighting against the Moroccan and Mauritanian annexation of the former Spanish Sahara and claimed they had seized the trawler because it had violated the waters of the Sahara republic to pillage its maritime riches. The guerrillas announced on November 25 that they would release the three Spanish fishermen.  On December 23, eight French hostages who had been held captive by the Polisario Front were handed over to UN Secretary General Kurt Waldheim by a minister of the Polisario Front at the UN office in Algiers.  The eight French citizens and Dr. Waldheim boarded a DC-9 aircraft in Algiers for Orly Airport in France.
LEBANON.  A rocket attack on the Egyptian Embassy in Beirut killed a security guard and wounded two guards and six Saudi Arabian soldiers.
FRANCE.  A gasoline container was set on fire outside the Egyptian embassy's Cultural Center in Paris, causing slight damage.
CANARY ISLANDS.  According to a press release by the Movement for the Self-Determination and Independence of the Canary Islands (MPAIAC), the group exploded a time bomb at the High Command of the Spanish Forces in Tenerife.  There was property damage but no injuries.
FRANCE.  The Tal az-Za'tar group claimed credit for a predawn bombing of the Bank Leumi le Israel in Paris, which caused extensive damage.  A phone claimed that the bombing was a warning to the Zionist killers who recently bombarded Lebanon and those who support them.  The group's name is taken from a Palestinian refugee camp in Lebanon, which was overrun by Christian militia in August 1976 after a fifty-four day siege.
CYPRUS.  Four bombs exploded at British military bases on Cyprus.  Two explosions at Dhekelia, a naval base near Larnaca, damaged two transformers on the base.  Another bomb exploded at a nearby radio antenna field damaging both a transformer and some antennas.  The fourth explosion at Akrotiri, an airbase near Limassol, damaged the pumps for the water system at the base.  No injuries were reported as a result of any of the explosions.
ARGENTINA.  Gunfire and firebomb attacks on Ford, Chrysler, and Mercedes-Benz dealerships were reported.  No motives were reported.
ISRAEL.  A bomb exploded in a crowded market street wounding six persons.
YUGOSLAVIA.  Police discovered a bomb aboard an international train traveling from West Germany.  All 140 passengers were evacuated before the bomb detonated.  The bomb had been planted in the last coach of the West German Railways train.  No details were available as to the extent of the damage.
TURKEY.  Two bombs were thrown at buildings used to house U.S. military personnel.  No injuries were reported.
YUGOSLAVIA.  Two men threw two Molotov cocktails at the West German embassy.  The first fell on the edge of the pavement and failed to explode. The second exploded in front of the embassy and started a fire.  The men escaped.
LEBANON.  During the night, an Egyptian bank and the adjacent office of Egyptair were slightly damaged by a bomb in Beirut. Lebanese Arab Youth claimed responsibility.
UNITED STATES.  The Almacen el Espanol in Elizabeth, New Jersey, a firm that specializes in sending medical supplies to Cuba, was bombed by Omega-7.
GREECE.  A parcel bomb was received by the U.S.  embassy.  The bomb was discovered and rendered safe by EOD (US) and the RSO.
PUERTO RICO.  FBI agents disarmed a bomb thrown from a passing car at the Venezuelan consulate in San Juan.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  An Egyptian security official defused a four-pound bomb two minutes before it was set to explode in the Egyptian embassy. The bomb was hidden in a plastic shopping bag in the embassy garden, propped up against the wall.  The two packages of explosives were set to explode at noon.
ISRAEL.  A hand grenade exploded in the bus station of East Jerusalem, slightly wounding three persons.  Palestinian guerrillas have often struck at the bus station to discourage Arabs from the West Bank from working in Israel.
ARGENTINA.  Unknown individuals attacked the Chilean consulate in Cordoba, causing some damage but no injuries to personnel.  One of the attackers, a twenty-four-year old bank employee, was killed.  The attackers painted slogans referring to the Beagle Channel dispute.
TURKEY.  An explosive device was thrown into the U.S. Cultural Center in Ankara.  According to a TRT correspondent, the windows of the U.S. Cultural Center were broken but no one was injured.
CHAD.  FROLINAT claimed to have killed all those on board a DC3 that it shot down by antiaircraft fire.  At least three French soldiers were killed.  They attacked another plane with antiaircraft fire, this time a DC4, and the French crew survived.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY. A Palestinian group called the Arab Revolutionary Army claimed it injected exported Israel oranges with mercury to sow panic and wreck the country's economy.  Five Dutch children fell ill and European officials checked thousands of oranges.  Two oranges were found in Holland and West Germany spiked with mercury.  A group calling itself the Arab Revolutionary Army claimed responsibility, saying, We do not intend to kill people in nations that import the oranges but to sabotage the Israel economy. Authorities felt the oranges must have been spiked in Rotterdam where they were shipped for repackaging and shipment to Europe.  A lemon injected with mercury was found in Heverlee, Belgium, near the university town of Louvain.  And a London woman found an Israeli orange spiked with mercury in a bag of fruit she bought in a London department store on February 7, making England the fifth country where poisoned fruit was discovered in one week.
PAKISTAN.  A male Pakistani armed with a grenade attempted to hijack a domestic Pakistani B0747 flight from Islamabad carrying 357 passengers. His grenade exploded, injuring three persons.  The plane landed safely and the man was turned over to police.
PHILIPPINES.  Three Ananda Marga members stabbed an Indian embassy official who was in the embassy at the time.  The embassy official, who was the personal secretary to the charge d'affaires, was stabbed in the chest and throat but survived the attack.
UNITED STATES.  A firebomb was thrown at the house of an Egyptian official of the World Bank, causing minor damage.  A group called the Jewish Committee for Concern claimed responsibility for the second such incident in a week.  An anonymous caller said that the group had thrown the bomb to protest a proposed sale of U.S. fighter planes to Egypt.
COLOMBIA.  A medium-strength bomb exploded in the hotel offices of Lufthansa in Bogota, causing no injuries but some damage.  The Andreas Baader Brigade of the German Liberation Popular Front claimed credit and warned that this was the beginning of a number of attacks against U.S. and German enterprises designed to manifest solidarity with oppressed people.
COLOMBIA.  Terrorists, invoking the name of dead West German anarchist Andreas Baader, claimed responsibility for bombing the Bogota hotel office of the German airline Lufthansa.  It caused no injuries but frightened the hotel guests.  West German authorities had previously told Colombian police that German terrorists might be hiding in Colombia.
BELGIUM.  A bomb exploded in the vicinity of the Iraqi embassy in Brussels.  The explosion damaged the entrance of the embassy and shattered windows in nearby apartments.  No one claimed responsibility.  No one was hurt.
GREECE.  Three small bombs exploded under cars owned by Turkish diplomats in the Paleon Faliron-Kalamaki area of Athens, slightly injuring a Turkish diplomat, two policemen and a passerby. Secret Armenian Army claimed responsibility.
GREECE.  Three bombs went off during the night under the cars of Americans in the Terpsithea and Glifadha section of Athens.
TURKEY.  A bomb exploded under a car belonging to the principal of the Tarsus American School in Adana.  The fender of the car was blown off and windows of nearby buildings shattered.  There were no injuries.  A typewritten letter, signed TIP, was received the same day saying that other explosives had been placed about the campus of the school. A police search proved negative.
PAKISTAN.  A terrorist riding a motorcycle lobbed a hand grenade over the wall of the U.S. Consulate in Lahore, but it exploded harmlessly in the courtyard.  No damage was done and no arrests were made. Observers believed the attack may have been by individuals seeking to avenge the death sentence of former Premier Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto (who had accused the U.S. of causing his overthrow to prevent the building of a Pakistani nuclear reprocessing plant).
SPAIN.  Four bottles filled with gasoline were thrown into a window of the library of the Spanish-American Cultural Center.  The resulting fire damaged furnishings and books before being put out by guards and cleaning personnel who were in the building.  No injuries were reported.  The Vanguardia Falangista claimed responsibility and said, in a telephone call, that this incident was to celebrate the second of May uprising against the French in 1808 and to protest U.S. bases in Spain.
DJIBOUTI.  Young Afar members of the National Independence Union, the Djibouti political party, kidnapped Rene Boucault, a French technician in northern Djibouti, and took him to Ethiopia.  He was released unharmed to the French embassy in Addis Ababa on May 16.  The group had called for democratic rights in Djibouti, the release of political prisoners, equality among the nationalities and workers of Djibouti and the immediate establishment of an all-party group to draft a new constitution.
TURKEY.  A bomb, apparently set by leftists protesting French involvement in Western Sahara, exploded in front of the French consulate in Istanbul, shattering windows and wrecking the entrance to the building.  There were no injuries reported.  An anonymous telephone caller told UPI, We revolutionaries, protesting the latest massacres of French imperialism against the Polisario Liberation Front guerrillas, have bombed the French Consulate.
FRANCE.  Three gunmen opened fire on passengers in the departure lounge of Orly Airport near Paris; French security police killed the attackers.  Three French tourists in a group that had booked on an El Al flight bound for Tel Aviv were reported to have been slightly wounded. One policeman was killed and two were seriously wounded. One of the dead gunmen carried passports from Lebanon and Kuwait.  The other two had Tunisian passports.  They carried submachine guns, extra clips of ammunition, as well as grenades and plastic explosives that appeared to be of Soviet manufacture.  Officials believed that there was no question but that the attack had been aimed at El Al even though there were no Israelis in the group waiting for the plane.  A previously unknown group calling itself the Organization of the Sons of Southern Lebanon claimed responsibility.  The group said the target had been a party of Israeli military officers supposedly boarding the plane.  The attack was made in France to remind France of its colonial past. One of the gunmen was tentatively identified as Mahmud Awada, a Lebanese member of a clandestine leftist organization, who headed a squad that murdered Francis Meloy, Jr., the U.S. ambassador to Lebanon, and his econonic counselor, Robert Waring, in 1976 during the Lebanese civil war.
TURKEY.  Several rounds were fired at the U.S. Consulate in Adana.  Local police chased but lost the perpetrators in traffic.  Five bullet holes were found between two windows one of which displays a sign for the U.S. consulate.  There were no injuries.
PORTUGAL.  A bomb was detonated at the Argentine embassy in Lisbon.  The Action Group for Communism left a paper at a Portuguese news agency which said the bombing was in protest of the killings and imprisonment by the Argentine government and had been timed to coincide with the World Cup soccer games.
ZIMBABWE.  Archie Dunaway, a white American Baptist evangelist, was stabbed to death by black nationalist guerrillas at the Sanyati Mission Hospital, where he was director of the nursing school.  The facility is 120 miles west of Salisbury.
LEBANON.  During the night, unidentified persons fired from a Peugeot at an Iraqi embassy car in Beirut.
ISRAEL.  A bomb for which the Palestine Liberation Organization took responsibility ripped apart a section of a crowded marketplace in Jerusalem, killing two persons and wounding 47.  The blast occurred as West German Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher was making a two-day official visit to Israel on the eve of a visit by Vice President Mondale of the United States.  On January 26, 1979, Israel troops smashed the Palestinian ring they blamed for at least 10 terrorist attacks.  They uncovered a large cache of arms.
SPAIN.  Demonstrators protesting the shooting of former Basque guerrilla leader Juan Echave threw firebombs at the French consulate in the northern cities of San Sebastian and Bilbao.  The demonstrations followed memorial ceremonies for Mr. Echave's wife Rosario who was killed in the attack in which Mr. Echave was seriously wounded.  An obscure Spanish rightist group calling itself Triple A claimed responsibility for the attack.
LIBYA.  Five members of Yasir Arafat's Fatah attacked the Tripoli offices of the Fatah Revolutionary Council, killing two and wounding one.  Killed were advanced cadre geophysical engineer Yusuf 'Ali Darwaish (alias Ahmad Hassan) and signal corrps Lieutenant 'Imad ad=Din Mustafa Shakir 'Ayyad (alias 'Imad Ash-Shaykh).
UNITED KINGDOM.  An attempt was made to assassinate Iraqi Ambassador Taha Ahmed al-Dawood in London.  A woman tossed a grenade under the car he was about to enter.  He escaped injury but two passersby were wounded.
PAKISTAN.  Two Arab gunmen ambushed an Iraqi diplomat outside his consulate in Karachi.  Guards killed one assailant and captured the other.  The government said the Iraqi official, who was not identified, and one guard were hit by the gunfire and rushed to the hospital.  Pakistani authorities said the gunmen were in their twenties and carried South Yemeni passports. A spokesman for the Palestine Liberation Organization suggested that it was part of the ongoing struggle between Iraqi communists and Baathists. The Baathists are the ruling party in Iraq which recently executed about 20 Communists.  More likely, however, is that it represented fighting between Fatah and Abu Nidal's Iraqi-supported rejection group, Black June.
KUWAIT.  Palestinian sources claimed that an assassination attempt had been made on PLO chief Yasir Arafat.  Other sources claimed that the attack had been made in Lebanon, when Arafat's car, carrying Qatari diplomatic license number 2, was fired on near Al-Masna' while Arafat was traveling from Beirut to Syria.
LEBANON.  A powerful bomb, made of approximately 550 pounds of plastic explosives, exploded in a nine-story building in the Palestinian quarter of West Beirut. The target of the blast appeared to have been the Palestinian splinter group, the Palestinian Liberation Front, whose headquarters were housed in the building. The PLF has opposed Arafats Fatah group in its policy over Israel and its cooperation with the UN. The building also has some offices for Fatah. Members of both groups were killed in the blast. About 150 people were killed in the attack and fifty wounded. Although leaders of PLF blamed the Popular Front for Liberation of Palestine for the blast, PFLP denied involvement.These numbers are estimates. Most sources say 150-200 people were killed or missing. A few say that 160 were killed.
UNITED STATES.  Two gunmen took control of the West German consulate in Chicago, taking eight hostages and demanding to communicate with Stjepan Bilandzic, a Croatian being held in Cologne, West Germany.  Bilandzic's brother, McLaughlin Evan Bilandzic, was brought to the building and spoke to the gunmen and apparently convinced them that it was futile to hold out. After a 10-hour siege, the gunmen (one a Chicago resident and the other an out-of-towner) released the hostages.  Bilandzic is said to be the founder of an alleged terrorist organization called the Croatian People's Resistance whose aim is the independence of Croatia from Yugoslavia.  On December 2, Bozo Kelava, 36, and Mile Kodzoman, 32, were acquitted of kidnap charges, but were convicted on a lesser charge of imprisoning West German Vice Consul Werner Ickstadt after seizing the consulate.  The two men face a maximum sentence of 10 years on the charge.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  Unidentified saboteurs set off eight explosives at six British military bases in West Germany.  The blasts slightly injured a woman soldier and caused structural damage.  A ninth charge failed to go off in Moenchengladback.  In October the IRA claimed the bombing in West Germany to establish our ability to strike at British imperialism anywhere at any time.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  Unidentified saboteurs set off eight explosives at six British military bases in West Germany.  The blasts slightly injured a woman soldier and caused structural damage.  A ninth charge failed to go off in Moenchengladback.  In October the IRA claimed the bombing in West Germany to establish our ability to strike at British imperialism anywhere at any time.
ARGENTINA.  A bomb exploded in the residence of a U.S. executive (legal advisor to General Motors) causing major damage but no injuries to the residence in Olivos, 20 km north of Buenos Aires.
PERU.  Police found Colombian newsman Roberto Fanjul, physically abused and mentally distressed by his kidnapping.  He had apparently been kidnapped by the so-called Peruvian Anti-Communist Alliance (AAP).  A note found near him accused Fanjul of being an Argentine Montonero and said that the newsman came to Peru to contribute to Trotskyite plans in the country.
EL SALVADOR.  A machine gun attack was staged at dawn by the clandestine Popular Liberation Forces (FPL) against the U.S.  Embassy in San Salvador. The group called the operation their war against Yankee imperialism. A document left called for the release of so called political prisoners and a reduction in the cost of housing, fertilizer, rents, agricultural land, water, and electric power.
GUATEMALA.  Terrorists destroyed the Guatemalan offices of the Nicaraguan Airlines Company (LANICA) with a powerful time bomb.  The explosion completely destroyed the office equipment and furniture.
ITALY.  A bomb exploded in front of the Cuban Embassy to the Vatican in Rome.  An anonymous caller to Il Tempo denounced the repressive government of Nicaragua's Somoza.  The Nicaraguan Embassy, which had been housed in the same building as the Cuban Embassy, had moved to another location six months earlier.  No damage or injuries were reported.
UNITED STATES.  A bomb placed on a street outside Madison Square Garden in New York City exploded.  Miraculously, no one was hurt. Only twenty minutes earlier, the street had been packed with fans who were leaving a basketball game.  A sporting goods store was damaged. The bombing, claimed to have been perpetrated by Omega-7, was in protest of Cuban boxers participating in a match at the Garden.
IRAN.  A pipe bomb exploded after being thrown through the window of a bus belonging to Bell Helicopter International in Isfahan.  Three Americans received minor injuries.
FRANCE.  Attackers entered a Palestinian library in Paris, held its occupants at gunpoint and started a fire.  Fighters for the Defense of Israel claimed responsibility for the act.
ITALY.  A VW showroom in Italy was the target of a bomb that caused minor property damage.  An anonymous telephone caller stated that the attack had been carried out by the German Red Army Faction in honor of Italian RAF comrades.
EL SALVADOR.  A powerful bomb exploded at the Guatemalan Consulate in the city of Chalchuapa, killing Manuel de Jesus Lopez, a watchman. The Farabundo Marti Popular Liberation Forces, FPL, claimed responsibility, saying that it was staged in solidarity with the struggle being waged by the people of Guatemala.
THE NETHERLANDS.  A Dutch customs officer was killed and two others wounded during an exchange of gunfire with two West German terrorists on the West German-Dutch border.  The two, a man and a woman, fled in a stolen van.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  Three terrorists, apparently Yugoslav emigres, attacked several Yugoslav citizens in Konstanz during the night, killing one and wounding two others.
EL SALVADOR.  A bomb exploded at McDonald's restaurant in San Salvador.  No injuries were reported and damage was minimal.  The Farabundo Marti Popular Liberation Forces (FPL) claimed responsibility.
UNITED STATES.  A 36-year-old tool and die manufacturer in Glendale, California, was shot to death in front of his home.  An American of Croatian descent, he was killed by two shots from a .32 caliber automatic. He had been active in Croatian political groups and had received an extortion letter earlier in June that appeared to come from a Croatian organization in Germany.  The FBI said at least 25 such letters had been mailed to Croatian-Americans in New York, Cleveland, Chicago, San Francisco, and Los Angeles.
EL SALVADOR.  Guerrillas belonging to the left-wing Fuerzas Armadas de Resistencia Nacional (FARN) kidnapped two British bank executives (Ian Massie and Michael Chatterton) and threatened to execute them on December 30 in view of the indifference of the London government and the institution for which they work, which refused to negotiate for the two Britons release.  At the same time they kidnapped Japanese Takakasu Suzuki, sales manager of a textile company jointly financed by Salvadoran and Japanese capital.  The kidnappers demanded money, the publication of manifestos in newspapers in El Salvador and the rest of the world, and the release of five political prisoners in El Salvador.  The Salvador government refused to allow the publication of the manifestos in the country and claimed it did not have the political prisoners demanded by the guerrillas.  The kidnappers postponed the execution of the Britons heeding the public appeal by the Human Rights Commission of El Salvador....Unofficial sources said Suzuki's family had also been sent a letter demanding an unknown amount of money and publication of statements from the group in major world newspapers.  Two of the prisoners whose release is demanded are Professor Manuel Rivera and Lil Milagro Ramirez, a student, both charged with being members of FPL (Popular Forces of Liberation).  In February 1979, according to a FARN announcement, the two Britons had been executed.  However, the two were released unharmed in mid-1979.
IRAN.  The homes of three Americans in Tehran's northern and eastern sectors were firebombed.
EL SALVADOR.  A Japanese executive of the Synthetics Industry of Central America (INSINCA) representing the Japanese firm Tore Textile, was kidnapped in El Salvador.  The Armed Forces of National Resistance (FARN) issued demands for money, release of political prisoners, and publication of its manifesto in return for the release of the executive.
ISRAEL.  Commandos of the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine claimed they had killed or wounded five Israelis with time bombs planted in Qiryat Arbaa settlement in the Hebron area.  The explosive was set off in a big shop.
ISRAEL.  A bomb exploded on a Jerusalem bus, wounding 22 persons.  The explosion occurred in the Jewish district of Bayit Vegan on the city's west side.  The bus operates between that neighborhood and East Jerusalem and included five U.S. citizens.  The PLO claimed responsibility.
IRAN.  The assassination of a key American Texaco oil official, Paul Grimm, in Ahvaz, along with the slaying on the same day of an Iranian colleague, Malek Bourojerdi, has dramatically accelerated the economic decline of Iran.  The assassinations were apparently the work of a small, hard-core terrorist group with ties to Palestinian guerrillas.  The killers apparently thought drastic measures were necessary to reverse a trend in the government's favor....  A link is suspected with the Soviet intelligence agency KGB, in weapons supply, electronic training, and general funding.
TURKEY.  The cars of two Americans in Izmir were firebombed, causing no injuries.
PORTUGAL.  U.S. environmentalists seriously damaged the whaler Sierra by ramming it with a ship called Sea Shepherd.  The subjects were arrested but fled the country.  They were believed to be members of the Fund for the Animals; Green Peace.
FRANCE.  Jose M.  Pagoaga, said to be the third ranking man in the Basque separatist organization ETA, was killed by gunfire apparently by Spanish rightists in retaliation for the murders of policemen in Spain.
EL SALVADOR.  Young leftist gunmen demanding freedom for political prisoners took over the Mexican embassy and an Organization of American States office and held at least 156 persons hostage.  Mexican embassy officials said that one security guard in the building was injured in the leg resisting the occupation, but there were no other immediate reports of violence. Spokesmen said [the gunmen were holding hostage about 150 Salvadoreans and six embassy staffers].  The youths demanded [hundreds of political prisoners] and the publication of a manifesto lashing out at the military regime of President Carlos Romero.  The youths said they belonged to the United Popular Action Front.  They also demanded an accounting of the 108 persons they said had disappeared, a euphemism for persons who may have been killed after they were picked up by plainclothesmen of El Salvador's harsh military regime.  They also demanded the lifting of a year-old Public Order Law that gave police wide-ranging authority to put down public demonstrations and political activities.  Eventually 90 freed hostages (mostly women) left the embassy and negotiations went on for freeing the others.  The hostages were freed on January 18 upon promise of asylum in Mexico.
IRAN.  A U.S. Air Force Major was shot and wounded as he was returning to his home in Tehran.  An unknown Iranian fired two pistol shots which struck the Major in the arm and back of the neck.
HONDURAS.  Terrorists attacked the Guatemalan Embassy in Tegucigalpa, the capital of Honduras.  The assailants took certain items which were not valuable, searched the files and soiled the ambassador's desk.  Unidentified persons claimed that the Sandinist National Liberation Front (FSLN) of Nicaragua was responsible; however, the Sandinists criticized the irresponsible way in which the media disseminated this information which they claim is false.
AFGHANISTAN.  The U.S.  Ambassador to Afghanistan, Adolph Dubs, was abducted by a group of Afghans described as right-wing Moslem terrorists and then shot to death.  It was uncertain whether Mr.  Dubs was killed by his abductors, as they had threatened, or was shot when government security aides rushed into the hotel where he was being held and opened fire.  According to American Embassy sources, the government force rushed the building in spite of a warning from the American Embassy in Kabul not to attack the hotel or open fire on the abductors while efforts were being made to obtain the Ambassador's release peacefully.  After the shooting, Mr.  Dubs was found dead of gunshot wounds in the head and heart.  Three of the abductors were killed in the shootout, and one was captured.  The kidnappers were believed to be seeking the release of three recently imprisoned Moslem religious leaders.  Deputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher expressed shock at the Soviet actions while advising police in Kabul, blaming the Soviets for failure to heed the U.S.  repeated requests that the assault not be undertaken.  The Afghan government claimed that it was a regrettable but unavoidable response to terrorists.  The affair left many unanswered questions:  the number and identify of the abductors, their motive, and a missing .22 caliber that fired several shots.
CHILE.  A bomb exploded at the Bi-National Center, a cultural center jointly sponsored by the United States and Chile in Santiago.  The explosion broke windows and caused minor damage to the building.  A flyer left in the mailbox claimed the Movement of the Revolutionary Left (MIR) was responsible.
ISRAEL.  The rail service between Jerusalem and Tel Aviv was suspended for several hours following an explosion on the railway line in which a train was derailed.  A second mine found on the line was dismantled. A Palestinian military spokesman claimed responsibility, claiming that a number of Israelis had been killed or wounded.
ISRAEL.  Israeli troops killed four Palestinian infiltrators in Tel Aviv apparently planning on taking hostages in Israel during President Carter's visit.  The guerrillas carried explosives and sabotage material, as well as leaflets indicating they intended to take hostages in a bid to force Israel to free Arab prisoners.
THE NETHERLANDS.  Two men shot and killed a Belgium National Bank official, Andre Michaux, as he parked his car in front of his home.  Police speculated that the slaying was connected with the assassination of the British ambassador (Sykes) since Mr. Michaux lived across the street from Britain's deputy ambassador to NATO.  The IRA is believed responsible although Italy's Red Brigade also claimed responsibility.
SYRIA.  A bomb explosion shook the U.S. Embassy in Damascus, causing some damage, on the eve of the signing of the peace treaty between Egypt and Israel.
FRANCE. A Jewish-owned perfume shop was bombed in Paris, apparently by terrorists as a result of the peace treaty signed between Israel and Egypt.
SPAIN.  ETA claimed credit for an attack on the offices of the Credit Lyonnais in San Sebastian.
TURKEY.  A bombing attempt was made on the El Al office in Istanbul.
CYPRUS.  A bomb exploded at the Israeli Embassy in Nicosia.  No injuries were reported; only minor damage was sustained.
UNITED STATES.  The residences of two men active in California's Croatian community were bombed.  Explosive devices (pipe bombs) were used which caused extensive damage.  The bombs exploded at the homes of Mario Forgiarini and Frank Striskovich, who are friends living in the neighboring communities of Rossmoor and Cerritos. Forgiarini is president of the Croatian community in Los Angeles FBI agents are investigating if there is a link between the two incidents.
PUERTO RICO.  Omega-7, implementing its prior warning that any Cuban, Puerto Rican, or American who traveled to Cuba would be punished accordingly, murdered Carlos Muniz Varela, the director of a travel agency that specialized in organizing tours to Cuba.  In January, Omega-7 had bombed his San Juan office.  After the assassination, a spokesman for the terrorist group announced that, Who travels to Cuba, regardless of his motives, is considered our enemy....  We will be forced to judge them as we did Muniz.
ISRAEL.  Four terrorists penetrating into Israel from Jordan were killed by IDF near kibbutz Tirat Zir.
LEBANON.  An explosive charge was detonated at the ICA Center (U.S. International Communication Agency) in Beirut.  Structural damage resulted but no injuries were reported.  No group claimed responsibility.
SPAIN.  GRAPO claimed credit for an explosion in the Valencia showroom of a Ford agent.  It damaged thirteen cars and blew out the windows.
AUSTRIA.  The Eagles of the Palestine Revolution claimed credit for the bombing of a Jewish synagogue in Vienna.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  West Berlin police arrested seven Lebanese who were planning to blow up the city's largest fuel depot.  Eighteen kilograms of explosives had been hidden in a locker in Berlin's main railway station.  Al Fatah guerrillas suspected.
COLOMBIA.  Leftist urban guerrillas set off a bomb at the home of the U.S.  Marines who guard the U.S.  Embassy in Bogota, injuring one marine and two maids.  Phone calls to radio stations claimed that the antigovernment Maoist Popular Liberation Army (EPL) was responsible for the bombing.
EL SALVADOR.  The People's Revolutionary Bloc (BPR) extremists took over the embassies of France and Costa Rica in San Salvador.  One of the guards at the Costa Rican embassy was shot but in satisfactory condition in a hospital.  The government refused to negotiate with the terrorists.  The People's Revolutionary Bloc submitted a communique to the local office of Agence France Presse (AFP) in which they demanded the release of political prisoners and that the governments report to the human rights commissions of the United Nations.  Both ambassadors, Michel Dondenne of France and Julio Esquivel of Costa Rica, were among the hostages.  By May 7, safe conduct out of the country was being offered the rebels if they would release the hostages.  Costa Rica's ambassador escaped with four women while his captors were eating dinner.  On the 11th, the French ambassador refused to be liberated without his coworkers.  The Popular Revolutionary Bloc continued to hold the French and Venezuelan embassies. (See incident of 5/11/79).  Finally, on June 1, the rebels ended their occupation, freed the French ambasssador and five other hostages held since May 4, and were flown out of the country.  Mexico granted asylum to 25.
EL SALVADOR.  Nine armed militants forced their way into the Venezuelan Embassy in San Salvador and declared Ambassador Santiago Ochoa, three other Venezuelan diplomats and four local employees hostages of the Popular Revolutionary Bloc.  The terrorists were part of the Bloc involved in the takeover of the French and Costa Rican embassies earlier in the month.  On May 2l, the Venezuelan ambassador, with a pistol smuggled to him by his wife, and four other hostages escaped by threatening his captors with a nonexistent submachine gun. After the five hostages escaped, dozens of heavily armed militia surrounded the embassy.  The rebels, although holding an empty embassy, refused to leave until instructed by their leaders.
EL SALVADOR.  Four of five bombs planted against the doors of the Costa Rican consulate in Santa Ana by the Popular Liberation Forces exploded, causing considerable damage.
EL SALVADOR.  The Farabundo Marti Popular Liberation Forces claimed credit for the strafing of an IBM installation in San Salvador.  No injuries were reported.
TURKEY.  An explosion occurred near a building housing the offices of the U.S.  International Communication Agency in Ankara.  Damage was minor.  No injuries were reported.
TURKEY.  Two gunmen shot and killed an American schoolteacher in the southeastern Turkish town of Adana.  The victim was identified as David Goodman who had been running a private English language school for two years.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  The Robert E. D. Straker Commando of the Territorial Resistance Army claimed credit for leaving a five-liter can of combustible liquid which burst into flames in the Aeroflot office in Frankfurt.  The group's communique said it would continue its struggle against left-wing and right-wing extremist parties, communists, fascists, left-wing and right-wing terrorists.
BELGIUM.  General Alexander Haig, scheduled to retire in four days as NATO Supreme Commander in Europe, escaped a terrorist bombing.  The bomb was aimed at Haig's car as it crossed a small bridge enroute to his office.  Guards traveling in a second car were slightly injured. The bridge, not far from Brussels, was wired with a land mine with a command-detonated device.  Apparently the would-be assassins were off on their timing because the land mine exploded between the two cars. Haig's car was only slightly damaged; the chase car was totally destroyed but its occupants received only minor injuries.  In July, the Andreas Baader Commando of the Red Army Faction (RAF), explained the failure of its attempted assassination in a letter to LE SOIR: We made a technical error; the general's car was traveling at a speed of 2 meters per tenth of a second and this was the time it took to manually detonate the 20 kg. of explosives.  As a result, the explosion occurred between the general's car and that of the escort following it.  An organization calling itself the Julien Lehant Brigade of the 25 of June 1979 also claimed responsibility on June 28 in a letter addressed to the press agency BELGA.  Bomb experts said it seemed more like the work of the Irish Republican Army.
NICARAGUA.  The FSLN kidnapped Colin Avery, an engineer from Brighton, England, while visiting a friend in Jinotepe, twenty-five miles north of Matagalpa.
FRANCE.  Three Turkish organizations were bombed in Paris:  Turkish Airlines, Turkish Tourist Office, and various premises of the Turkish embassy.  Property damage was minor but a custodian at one of the buildings was slightly injured.  Responsibility was claimed by a commando of the avengers of the Armenian genocide in an anonymous call to Agence France- Presse.
ISRAEL.  An Israeli Army patrol intercepted three Palestinian guerrillas heading for Israel and killed them in a brief battle.  There were no Israeli casualties in the clash which occurred inside Lebanon near the western flank of Mount Hermon.  The Palestinians were reported to be carrying weapons, explosives, loudspeakers, and leaflets attesting that their intention was to take hostages and bargain for them.
LEBANON.  A bomb ripped through the Libyan-Tunisian Bank in Beirut causing heavy damage to the building and injuring two passing motorists. Guerrillas of the Moslem Shiite Sadr Brigade organization claimed responsibility for the blast and said the attack was part of a campaign against Libyan targets everywhere.  We shall keep up the attacks until Libyan authorities are compelled to release Imam Mousa al Sadr.  Sadr is the top religious leader of Lebanon's Shiites who make up the country's largest Moslem sect.
COSTA RICA.  An unidentified number of gunmen fired at the San Jose residence of U.S.  Ambassador Marvin Weissman from a passing automobile. No injuries were reported.
LEBANON.  The Imam as-Sadr Brigades threw a bomb at the Libyan News Agency office in Beirut, injuring an employee.
EL SALVADOR.  Spanish businessman, Jaime Conde Feijoo, was kidnapped by several unidentified individuals in San Salvador; his wife tried to pursue his captors but was pushed to the ground.
IRAN.  Two rocket-propelled grenades were fired early in the morning at the U.S. Embassy after a caller told the Revolutionary Guards to vacate the compound.  One of the grenades failed to detonate, the other caused some damage.  No injuries were reported.  The attack may have been carried out by militiamen who had been removed from their posts at the embassy the previous week.
ISRAEL.  Two bomb explosions 10 minutes apart ripped through crowds of adults and children in an amusement park, wounding three persons.  Police closed off the Tel Aviv park, blaming Palestinian terrorists.
ARGENTINA.  A bomb exploded in the Cordoba branch of the Israeli bank, causing some damage but no injuries.
TURKEY.  Two unidentified persons threw a bomb at the Iranian Consulate in Istanbul.  Security forces defused it before it could explode.
IRAN.  Three Lebanese gunmen hijacked an Italian Alitalia flight  originating from Tehran with a stop in Beirut to protest the disappearance of their religious leader.  The plane carrying 185 people was hijacked after the scheduled stop in Beirut. The hijackers were members of the Imam Sadr movement and residents of a Shiite suburb in Tehran.  The hijackers commandeered the DC-8 jet over Cyprus; denied permission to land in France, they put down at Rome's Fiumicino Airport and sat through a 13-hour siege.  They released 147 passengers two hours after touching down and let the last 28 passengers deplane later.  The plane then departed and flew to Iran where they surrendered.  The hijackers, students, denounced Libyan leader Qaddafi for the disappearance of their religious leader, Imam Musa Sadr.
LEBANON.  A group of unidentified gunmen riding in a Mercedes Benz sprayed gunfire on the U.S. Embassy in Beirut shortly after a Lebanese police officer arrested a man who tried to enter the building by force.  No injuries were reported.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  An explosion in a U.S. Army barracks in West Berlin injured one American soldier and caused considerable damage.  There was no official comment from U.S. authorities.
EL SALVADOR.  Gunmen kidnapped two American businessmen and killed their Salvadoran driver only hours after leftist guerrillas attacked four different national guard posts, killing one soldier.  The abduction occurred near San Salvador's International Airport.  The two men were identified as Dennis McDonald, 37, and Fausto Bucheli, both employees of the Beckman Instrument Company, of Fullerton, California.  McDonald was general manager of the company's Salvadoran subsidiary, Aplar; Bucheli was an engineer.  The slain driver, Jose Luis Paz Tartara, was shot when he tried to resist.  The Revolutionary Party of Central American Workers claimed responsibility for the kidnapping; the terrorists demanded that the Beckman Electronics Company run ads in Central American, European, and U.S. papers calling for a leftist overthrow of the government of El Salvador. The ads were in clumsy English poorly translated from Spanish; they illustrated photos of bloody bodies while the text condemned bestial sadism by the government of El Salvador and says the executives were kidnapped as representatives of a fundamental enemy of the Central American revolution, the North American imperialst. The Americans were released November 7, 1979, after a reported $10 million ransom was paid and two-page ads appeared in the October 11 Los Angeles Times and New York Times calling for a popular insurrection and liberation war against the government of El Salvador.  The ads, signed by the Central American Workers' Revolutionary Party, also appeared in Central American and European newspapers.  Fred Rayne, the negotiator and security advisor for Beckman stated that the terrorists were very cooperative and appeared to be a group of young students dedicated to a cause.
ISRAEL.  Three bombs apparently placed by Palestinian terrorists exploded in the business section of Tel Aviv, injuring six persons.  Earlier, a bomb exploded a half mile away but caused no casualties.
NICARAGUA.  A shot was fired through the front door of the Spanish embassy.
ITALY.  During the night, an explosion damaged part of the French Embassy's garage and parked cars in Rome.  A woman, in a telephone call to the paper Il Messaggero, claimed the bombing on behalf of the Brigate Internazionali Contro la Repressione In Europa (International Brigades against Repression in Europe), and indicated that the Bank of France in another section of Rome would be attacked.
EL SALVADOR.  A powerful bomb exploded at the Bank of America's office in San Salvador, causing heavy damage but no casualties.  A leftist group, the Farabundo Marti Popular National Liberation Forces, claimed responsibility.
UNITED STATES.  Eulalio Jose Negrin, a Cuban American who has been instrumental in establishing a dialogue between Cuban exiles in the United States and the Cuban government, was assassinated near his home in Union City, New Jersey.  Omega 7 claimed responsibility.  Negrin was shot from a moving car by two men wearing ski masks.
EL SALVADOR.  The Popular Liberation Forces bombed the McDonald's restaurant in San Salvador, killing one person.
UNITED STATES.  Eight Iranians carrying rifles, telescopic sights, and ammunition in three suitcases were arrested by federal agents in Baltimore-Washington Airport as they were about to board a Trans World flight to New York.  One piece of luggage reportedly contained a map of Washington on which several embassies were marked.  There are strong presumptions that the group planned to seize the airport lounge and take hostages.
ISRAEL.  Thirteen people waiting to board a bus in Jerusalem were injured when a bomb exploded on the bus.  The driver of another bus escaped injury while trying to drive to safety after a bomb had been discovered and the passengers evacuated.  The PLO claimed responsibility.
SPAIN.  The Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia claimed credit for two bombs that went off in front of the Madrid offices of British Airways, and Trans World Airlines.  The ASALA said these were airlines of world imperialists, and that the attack was to serve as a warning to Pope John Paul to cancel his trip to Turkey.
THAILAND.  Two M-79 grenades were detonated at the U.S. embassy, causing no injuries and only superficial damage to a fountain in front of the main embassy building.  No one claimed responsibility.
LIBYA.  The U.S. embassy was attacked by a Libyan mob led by uniformed Libyan militiamen.  The front door was smashed in by a battering ram; fire was set by attackers which gutted the first floor and damaged the second floor.  The attack was believed to be caused by pro-Iranian sympathizers and condoned by the Tripoli government of Qaddafi.  The United States government is reviewing its relations with Libya and has recalled all American dependents of embassy staff. The United States threatened to take additional steps if Libya refused to accept responsibility for the attack.
ITALY.  Two bombs exploded in the center of Rome, injuring nine people and damaging several offices, including those of Pan American World Airways, British Airways, and Philippine Airways.  A group calling itself the New Armenian Resistance Movement claimed responsibility in a telephone call to a news agency, saying the airlines had been singled out in our fight against Turkish fascism and world imperialism.
EL SALVADOR.  Leftists held an American Peace Corps volunteer hostage with other people in a downtown market in San Salvador.  The hostage was identified as Deborah Loft, 24.  The Popular Leagues, one of three major leftist groups, said they would hold the hostages until their demands are met.  The demands include cuts in stall rents and disbandment of market police.  Loft was freed after 10 days captivity.
SWEDEN.  Secret police are investigating the mysterious death of Zaire's ambassador, Mobutu Dongo Yema, brother of Zaire President Mobutu Sese Seko.  The ambassador, 43, died after he was rushed to the hospital suffering from what doctors said may have been poisoning. Hours earlier, Mobutu had asked Swedish authorities for more protection. He mentioned threats to his life from oppositional elements from my homeland.
ITALY.  A bomb placed by ASALA exploded in front of the Dina Boarding House.  The home is a refugee center and a part of Ansha in Rome, responsible for the transfer of many Armenians to the United States and other countries.  ASALA said the bombing was a warning to the Italians to halt what they call the Armenian diaspora.
LEBANON.  The Iraqi Embassy in Beirut, Lebanon, was attacked causing heavy damage.  A series of rockets tore into the building.
UNITED STATES.  The Padron Cigar Factory in Miami's Little Havana was bombed by Omega-7.
ITALY.  An unarmed Tunisian hijacker held 89 persons hostage on an Italian Alitalia DC-9 for 12 hours claiming he had an accomplice with a bomb.  The 28-year-old hijacker demanded that the passengers be exchanged at Tunis Airport in Tunisia for 25 jailed union leaders who, he said, must also be given their jobs back.  He had seized the plane midway through its scheduled flight from Rome to Tunis.  However, the Tripoli airport where he wanted the flight diverted was closed due to a sand storm; the Maltese authorities refused landing at Malta which resulted in a final landing at Palermo where, after a stalemate, the hijacker surrendered to Italian authorities.
SPAIN.  Responsibility for bomb attacks against airline offices in Madrid has been claimed by a Commando for Justice for the Genocide of Armenians. The same Armenian group claimed responsibility for a number of attacks last year in Madrid, Rome, Paris.  Bomb attacks occurred at TWA (several injuries), British Airways, Swissair, and Sabena (Belgian).
IRAQ.  A Lebanese man hijacked a Middle East Airlines Boeing 707 with 137 people on board.  The jet was enroute from Baghdad, Iraq to Beirut.  The hijacker used a kitchen knife.  The hijacker demanded that a press conference be held at the Beirut airport.  He surrendered to security agents when the plane landed.  There were no injuries. The hijacker said at the press conference:  I want the Islamic foreign ministers conference to clear the mystery that surrounds the disappearance of Iman Mousa Sadr. A number of other hijackings were related to the same disappearance.
LEBANON.  Three Lebanese, armed with pistols and hand grenades, were arrested at the Beirut airport as they tried to board an Air France plane during an attempted hijacking.  Police sources said the three wanted to draw attention to the disappearance of the spiritual leader of Lebanon's 800,000 Shiite Moslems.
BELGIUM.  Armenians claimed credit for bombing the Turkish airlines office in Brussels.  Two explosions within five minutes of each other extensively damaged the downtown Brussels offices of both the Soviet and Turkish Airlines.  The explosives were concealed in plastic bags and placed in front of the two offices.  No injuries were reported as a result of either explosion.  The New Armenian Resistance claimed responsibility for both bombings in a communique to a press agency.
EL SALVADOR.  Leftist militants took over the Spanish embassy in San Salvador, holding the ambassador, Victor Sanchez-Mesa y Juste, and eleven hostages.  During negotiations the leftists later released four.  The February 28 Popular Leagues said they were demanding an investigation of alleged human rights violations by the Red Cross and the Organization of American States as well as a break in relations between Spain and other democratic governments and El Salvador's repressive regime.  They also called for the release of other leftists imprisoned in Salvadoran jails.  The takeover sparked threats of reprisals from right-wing groups who said they would burn the Spanish Embassy in a replay of an attack by police on the Spanish Mission in Guatemala City the previous week in which 39 people were killed.  On February 11, a spokesman said, if they don't release our comrades or tell us where their bodies are buried, we will be here for months. The Leagues were demanding the release of three Leagues leaders and two members of the leftist Popular Revolutionary Bloc, another of El Salvador's powerful leftist alliances.  The siege ended on the 18th of February when the government allegedly acceded to the demands for the release of prisoners.
EL SALVADOR.  A group of leftist militants seized the Panamanian Embassy in San Salvador for the second time in a month, taking three hostages, including the Panamanian Ambassador.  The militants demanded the release of prisoners.  They left the embassy after the ambassador promised that he would present their demands to the government of El Salvador.
TURKEY.  The home of two U.S. Embassy counselors was bombed in Ankara.  There was some damage but no one was hurt.
ITALY.  The Secret Armenian Army for the Liberation of Armenia claimed credit for a bomb in Rome that damaged the offices of El Al. An anonymous telephone caller later told the Rome office of the U.S.  Associated Press that the bombs were set off at 1) Swissair as a warning that it must not repeat its mistake and jail innocent Armenian citizens, 2) Lufthansa as a punishment for the German government which helps Turkish fascism..., and 3) El Al because of its role of Zionism....
SPAIN.  An Arab attacker, apparently seeking to kill a Jewish leader, mistakenly killed a Spanish lawyer.  The police arrested a suspect, Said Ali Salman, 27, for the submachine gun attack.  He was carrying a photo of Max Mazin, president of the Spanish branch of B'nai B'rith , who lived in the same apartment building as the lawyer and looks like him.
ITALY.  Armenians claimed credit for two bombs at Turkish Airlines in Rome's Piazza della Repubblica, killing two and injuring 12. Responsibility for the attack was claimed by the Armenian Secret Army. A second bomb was calculated to kill or wound the curious who came to watch after the first bomb went off.  A telephoned warning was later received warning against Turkish fascism and Italian imperialism which ignore the Armenian cause.
UNITED STATES.  In New York, a fire caused by an incendiary bomb extensively damaged the Angolan Mission to the United Nations. Responsibility for the attack was claimed by Omega 7, an anti-Castro Cuban group that has greatly escalated its terrorist attacks over the past winter against the Soviet and Cuban UN missions and related targets.
UNITED STATES.  According to Cuban officials, an explosive device was placed under the limousine of Cuba's U.N.  Ambassador Raul Roa Kouri in an effort to assassinate him.  It was located and later defused. An anonymous phone call to UPI claimed responsibility for the attempted bombing for Omega 7.  On October 2, 1982, three men were arrested in New Jersey and one in Miami, Florida, by FBI agents, who had spent over two years investigating the incident.  A fifth man is being sought.  The government men are under court order not to discuss the case.  The men involved are Andre Garcia and Alberto Perez, of Elizabeth, New Jersey, Eduardo Losado-Fernandez of Newark, New Jersey, and Pedro Remon of Miami, Florida.  The complaint charged all five men with transporting explosives from New Jersey to New York.  If convicted, they face up to 10 years in prison and a $10,000 fine.  An informant who was an accomplice in the transportation of the explosives had provided the information to the FBI.
GUATEMALA.  Several unidentified individuals riding in a car attacked the Japanese embassy in Guatemala City.  Several bullets shot from the moving vehicle broke the main window and hit the walls.  There were no injuries.
ITALY.  Armenian guerrillas shot and wounded the Turkish ambassador to the Vatican and his driver in a campaign to remind the world of what they call the genocide of Armenians in Turkey in 1915.  A group called the Justice Commandos of the Armenian Genocide telephoned Reuters news agency to claim responsibility.  The caller said, Our only aim is to strike against Turkish personalities and Turkish institutions all over the world.
ITALY.  Another Libyan businessman, Abdul Aref, was shot to death in the fashionable Cafe de Paris, in Rome.  Two days after his death, a spokesman for the Libyan Embassy in Rome told reporters the Libyan Revolutionary Committees had decided to eliminate all traitors who did not return to Libya by June 10.
YUGOSLAVIA.  In Belgrade, a bombing attack was made on the PLO liaison office in which a vehicle parked outside the office was demolished and three occupants believed to be PLO operatives were injured.
UNITED KINGDOM.  Six armed Iranians took over the Iranian Embassy in London and held 26 hostages for nearly six days.  Three of the hostages were British; the remaining were Iranian diplomats and staff with some foreign visitors.  Police cordoned off the embassy and tried patiently to negotiate with the gunmen through the embassy windows and by telephone.  The gunmen were from Khuzistan, the oil-producing province of Iran on the southern border with Iraq.  They claimed to be members of the Group of the Martyrs and were demanding autonomy for their province in addition to the release of 91 prisoners being held in Khuzistan.  They wanted the prisoners flown to London and then safe passage guaranteed for all, including the hostages, out of the country.  They pledged to not harm non-Iranian hostages and apologized for the trouble they were causing London.  They wanted to deal with the Khomeini government but got little response.  Iran sent an open letter to the gunmen refusing their demands and stating that the Khuzistan prisoners would be executed if any of the embassy staff came to harm.  Bani-Sadr said his government is ready to accept the martyrdom of our children in England rather than submit to blackmail.During the course of the negotiations the gunmen released 5 hostages at separate times.  On the 5th of May, shots were heard and a dead hostage was dumped out the front door of the embassy.  The gunmen informed police that they would kill an additional hostage every 30 minutes until their demands were met--those demands being now simply safe passage out of the country. Authorities immediately sent into action their one plan in reserve. Commandos of the Army's anti- terrorist unit of the Special Air Service Regiment (SAS) stormed the embassy, killing five terrorists and rescuing 19 hostages.  When the black-garbed commandos entered by lowering themselves by ropes from the roof and crawling in windows the gunmen panicked and opened fire on their hostages, wounding several and killing one.   Explosions caused by stun-grenades used by the commandos to disorient the terrorists and catch them by surprise, quickly spread flames through the building and eventually gutted the embassy.  As the hostages were rushed out of the building to safety, their identities were checked.  Mistaken at first for a hostage, one of the gunmen, Fowzi Nejad, 23, was discovered and arrested.  Nicknamed Baby Face by the hostages, he was called a good boy by some of the Iranians but nevertheless was packed off to jail.  Later, in January of 1981, he was sentenced to life imprisonment.
COLOMBIA.  Unidentified persons attempted to burn down the Venezuelan Consulate during the night.  They set fire to the main entrance and then fled when they were discovered.  There was minor damage. Security has been tightened.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  Omran el-Mehdawi, former secretary for economics and finance in Libya's West German embassy, was shot and killed by a pistol-wielding gunman who said he worked for the Libyan Information office.  The captured gunman stated he did it for non-payment of a personal debt since 1975.  However, it was in 1975 that the Libyan government announced it would nationalize all industries.  El-Mehdawi was one of many Libyan businessmen who fled Libya in 1975, taking their funds with them to Europe, thus incurring the wrath of Qaddafi.
EL SALVADOR.  U.S.  Marines and American Ambassador Robert White's bodyguards used tear gas and a bulletproof truck to break a siege of White's residence in San Salvador by Salvadoran rightists.  The Marines and bodyguards lobbed tear gas canisters to scatter about 30 rightists.  No one was injured.  The rightists accused White of being a Communist and demanded that he pressure the government to release the jailed leader (Major Roberto d'Abuisson) of an attempted right-wing coup.  Hundreds of demonstrators announced they would continue to lay siege to the U.S.  embassy until the United States orders his withdrawal.  The demonstrators accuse Ambassador White of meddling too much in Salvadoran internal affairs.
ITALY.  A Libyan restaurant owner in Rome escaped an attempt on his life.  Salem Mohammed Fezzani, a naturalized Italian citizen, was shot at by another Libyan, Monsur Mezaroni Belgozem, who dined in the restaurant with two other Libyans.  Three shots missed and the assailant was captured by police while trying to flee.  Under police questioning, Belgazem said he was sent by the people to kill Fezzani. Libyan citizens have been killed recently in Britain, West Germany, and Greece.
TURKEY.  The Turkish-Iraqi pipeline near Kayri village was bombed by Kurdish militants who, when captured in early 1982 claimed that they been sent by the Kurdish National Unity Party leader Jalal Talabani in Syria.  The pipeline carries Iraqi oil from Kirkuk to the Turkish port of Iskenderun.  The two Kurds arrested were allegedly responsible for a similar bombing of the pipeline in May 1979.
ITALY.  Two Arabic-speaking gunmen walked into the Iraqi Embassy in Rome, pulled their weapons and ordered an embassy chauffeur to call Iraqi consular officials.  As the chauffeur began phoning, one of the gunmen bolted and began shooting, then was wounded by a guard.  His partner seemed to lose control, shot and killed the chauffeur, and escaped through a side entrance.  The assailants who shouted Viva Khomeini as they fired, left a brown leather suitcase containing a time bomb when they fled.  The bomb was deactivated by police experts three minutes before it was set to go off.At first police sources thought the assailants were Iranians and that the incident was part of the continuing hostility between Iran and Iraq.  But later they reported that the one wounded gunmen who was captured, claimed they were both Iraqi.  In Beirut, Lebanon, news organizations received telephone calls from a man who said an anti-Government Iraqi militant group known as Iraq's Mujahedeen Islam was responsible for the attack.
UNITED STATES.  A powerful bomb ripped through the Washington, D.C., home of Yugoslavia's charge d'affaires, Vladimir Sindjelic.  The bomb had been placed in a window box outside their sitting room.  No one was injured although there was a great deal of internal and external damage.  A group of Croatian nationalists (Croatian Freedom Fighters) claimed full responsibility for the act which they said, in a letter mailed to the Washington Post, was a sign of protest against the Yugoslav government and its treatment of the Croatian movement's supporters.  Croatian terrorists have been involved since 1971 in a series of assassination attempts in various countries ranging from West Germany to Paraguay.  At least 50 persons have died since 1972 in various acts of terrorism instigated by Croatians or their supporters.
LIBYA.  A mob of demonstrators attacked and set fire to the British Embassy while the staff was inside.  However, no injuries were reported and there was little damage to the building.  The attack seemed provoked by the expulsion of Libya's Chief of Mission from England.
COLOMBIA.  Two people were shot and wounded when alleged guerrillas unsuccessfully attempted to kidnap Kenneth H.  Reysen, manager of the Colgate-Palmolive Company.  Six heavily armed men surprised Reysen as he was leaving his home.  His chauffeur, the watchman at his home, and several policemen engaged the attackers in gunfire, forcing them to flee.  The watchman was wounded, as was one of the guerrillas.
SOVIET UNION.  A group of expatriate Iranians attempted to set fire to the Iranian Consulate in Baku, near the Iranian border.  The Iranians were demanding to return to their homeland.
FRANCE.  Molotov cocktails were thrown against the Afghanistan embassy in Paris but did not explode.  Tracts were found on the site signed with the acronym GIN (groupe d'intervention nationaliste)-- possibly Afghan reactionaries.
HONDURAS.  Fabio Ponce, Nicaraguan consul in Danli, came close to being fatally shot when unidentified persons machine gunned the Nicaraguan Consulate.  The attack was attributed to Somozists living in Honduras.
BELGIUM.  Palestinian terrorists who attempted to attack arriving passengers on an El Al flight to Brussels from Tel Aviv were foiled when the plane arrived 30 minutes early.
UNITED STATES.  California.  A worldwide organization of native Taiwanese is believed responsible for the bombing death of Chang Lin Lee, a Nationalist Chinese visitor in Torrance.
MALTA.  A bomb was found by police in front of the Libyan Arab Airlines office in Valletta.  The bomb had a faulty fuse and failed to explode.
ITALY.  In Rome, a bomb assault took place against the SNIA-Techint.  The damage was devastating.  The company had furnished Iraq with nuclear technology.  The attack was claimed by the Committee for the Defense of the Islamic Revolution (Comite de sauvegarde de la revolution islamique).  On the same day in France another bombing was claimed by this Committee. (See France, August 7, l980) (LE MONDE, 8/9/80)
LEBANON.  U.S.  Ambassador John Gunther Dean escaped unharmed after gunmen in a speeding automobile attacked his bulletproof limousine as he was leaving his Hazmieh residence in a convoy.  The ensuing battle between the ambassador's bodyguards and the gunmen left the embassy car demolished on the passenger side, glass shattered, and tires flat.  Two Lebanese suspected of being linked to the assassination attempt were taken into custody for questioning.  The attack came just hours after Dean said the United States was working with Israel and the United Nations to end the violence among Christian militiamen and Palestinian guerrillas in southern Lebanon.  Dean had also created an uproar in August when he condemned an Israeli raid on Palestinian guerrilla strongholds in the area. Responsibility for the attack was later claimed by the Front for the Liberation of Lebanon from Foreigners, a shadowy right-wing group.
EL SALVADOR.  The Guatemalan Embassy was the scene of a shootout between policemen guarding the embassy and members of the People's Liberation Front (FPL).  There were no casualties.
EL SALVADOR.  Eighteen leftist guerrillas led by a woman shot their way into the Organization of American States local offices, killing a guard, seizing the building and taking eleven hostages to demand an end to Salvadoran government repression against leftist sympathizers. They also demanded the release of political prisoners.  Government troops in tanks ringed the mission and then pulled back to allow negotiations to take place.  The guerrillas were members of the Revolutionary Democratic Front.  The hostages included the OAS delegate from Nicaragua, as well as 10 other diplomats and OAS employees.  On the fifth day negotiations started with a representative of the OAS from Washington.  On the 10th day an OAS assistant director was released due to his cardiac condition.  On the 11th day, September 28, the leftists freed the remaining hostages. The OAS special envoy stated he convinced the leftists that the government of El Salvador promised to investigate the status of alleged political prisoners and the disappearances of hundreds of leftists.
MAURITANIA.  The Spanish flag fishing vessel Sarita was boarded off Mauritania by Polisario guerrillas who kidnapped the crew.
UNITED STATES.  A bomb, planted by Omega-7, destroyed two homes in Elizabeth, New Jersey. No one was hurt, though 15 persons were left homeless.
PHILIPPINES.  Several hotels, including the Peninsula Hotel, the Marlim Mansion Hotel, the Century Park Sheraton, and the Philippine Plaza, were bombed in a terrorist attack by the April 6 Liberation Movement, which is calling for the overthrow of the regime of President Ferdinand E.  Marcos. The bombing appeared to be part of a campaign to discourage foreign tourism in which four luxury hotels were attacked and at least 7 people were injured.  The April 6 group, in a statement, said the bombings were to  inform Mr.  Marcos that he can no longer control the people's anger and to serve notice to all foreign tourists not to travel to the Philippines.
SPAIN.  In Madrid, the office of Alitalia was bombed by a group calling itself the Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia.  Although physical damage was minimal, 12 persons were injured.  The bomb exploded at a time calculated to injure a large number of people.
LEBANON.  A bomb directed at a Swiss business exploded in the predominantly Muslim section of west Beirut.  The October Third Organization claimed responsibility.
UNITED KINGDOM.  A Turkish Airlines office was bombed in London causing damage but no injuries.  An unidentified caller said a group called the Armenian Secret Army was responsible.  The caller said the bomb was meant to protest the Turkish goverment's bloody action against Kurds and Armenians.  The bombing might also have been related to bombings in Hollywood, Paris, and an almost simultaneous one in London.  Scotland Yard said that it would be an extraordinary coincidence if the two London bombings were not related.
FRANCE.  A Swiss Tourist Office in Paris was bombed causing damage but no injuries.  This was the second bombing in two days aimed at Swiss buildings and possibly the fourth related to bombings in which the Organization of October 3rd, an Armenian terrorist group, claimed responsibility.
PHILIPPINES.  A bombing of a convention of the American Society of Travel Agents in Manilla injured 20 people, 7 of whom were Americans. The bomb exploded during a movie which started directly after President Fedinand Marcos gave the opening address.  Marcos and the American Ambassador, who was sitting nearby, were not among those injured.  The bombing led to the issuing of an arrest warrant for 30 people who Marcos claimed were involved in a plot to destabilize the country through the use of terrorism.  The arrest warrant was issued based on evidence given by a Philippines born American named Victor Burns Lovely who as a member of an anti-martial law terrorist group, was severely injured while assembling a bomb in September.  He had since turned state's witness.  The list of thirty names included some prominent political figures in the Philippines, including a former senator.  The senator, who had been injured in a terrorist attack in 1971, denied any involvement in the bombing.  Thirteen people believed responsible were sentenced on February 11, 1982, to four to six months in jail but the judge said they would be freed in two weeks because they had alredy been held more than a year.  One of those sentenced was Doris Nuval Baffrey, 28, a U.S. resident.
PORTUGAL.  The automobile of the head of the Unified Democratic Front of Mozambique a clandestine opposition movement, was bombed in Lisbon. The car was destroyed but there were no injuries.  No organization claimed responsibility.
HONDURAS.  The Chilean Embassy in Tegucigalpa was bombed critically injuring four police guards.  The Lorenzo Zelaya Guerrilla Commando claimed responsibility.
ITALY.  Two bombings, one at a Swiss Airlines office, and one at a Swiss Tourist bureau, injured 5 people in Rome, Italy.  The bombings were first claimed by the October Third Group which said it was protesting Swiss and Italian fascism.  However, in a call to Agence France-Presse, the Armenian Secret Liberation Army and the Turkish Kurdish Worker's Party claimed responsibility.  They said that while they regretted injury to innocent people, there would be more attacks against private and public establishments in Turkey because of growing opposition to the government and in Switzerland because it locks up our militants.
ITALY.  In Rome, the offices of the Turkish Airlines were damaged when a powerful bomb exploded.  The Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia claimed responsibility for the incident in a call to the Rome office of AP shortly after the explosion.
FRANCE.  Three men machine-gunned a cafe in Hendaye on the French side of the Spanish border, killing two and wounding 10.  The cafe is regularly frequented by E.T.A.  members, which may have prompted the attack.  The three men took off in their car and broke through a nearby frontier post in Spain.  Across the border, they were held briefly by police and then released before French authorities could even obtain their identities, despite urgent phone calls from France. A presumption is that the three men had connections with the Spanish police, and were, in fact, sent on police business.
GUATEMALA.  The Uruguayan embassy in Guatemala City was bombed.  The People's Guerrilla Army, the EGP, claimed responsibility.
FRANCE.  An employee of the Swiss consulate in Marseille discovered a time bomb upon arriving for work.  The consulate was unoccupied due to the early hour.  A police bomb expert defused the bomb before it exploded.  The bomb was made of sticks of dynamite activated by a sophisticated electronic igniter, but the timer apparently malfunctioned. The Armenian terrorist group the Third of October is believed responsible.
UNITED STATES.  Washington, D. C.  An unexploded bomb was discovered at the Palestine Information Office (PIO), the PLO's unofficial embassy, after UPI received a letter in Hebrew taking credit for an expected explosion on behalf of a previously unknown group, Hatikva Leumi (Hope of the Nation).
PERU.  Unknown persons made two dynamite attacks against the Chinese Embassy.  There was some damage but no injuries.  There have been several other dynamite attacks in the country; about 100 have occurred since July.  There have also been several slogans painted throughout the city of Lima, where the embassy is located, insulting the Chinese government and supporting Mao's widow who is on trial.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  A former Israeli officer and aide de camp of General Moshe Dayan during the fight for Israeli Independence, Shlomo Levin, was shot to death in his home in Erlangen, near Nuremberg.  Also killed was his companion Frida Poshke.  Since moving to West Germany in 1960, Lewin had become a leader of Nuremberg's Jewish community.  Investigators ruled out robbery and said the killers could probably be found among the enemies of Israel and were politically motivated.
GUADELOUPE. A bomb planted in an airport luggage locker at Point-a-Pitre exploded a few hours before vacationing French President D'Estang and his family were to pass through.  The bomb injured one Chilean tourist and a cleaner, and caused considerable damage.  The attack was attributed to the Armed Liberation Group of Guadeloupe (GLA), which is believed to have strong ties to Cuba.
SPAIN.  A newspaper reporter was said to be in serious condition after a bomb planted in a telephone booth he was using exploded and blew off both his legs.  The man had come to the scene to investigate an explosion at the Swissair airline office which had taken place shortly before, and was using the phone booth to report to his newspaper.  The second bomb was directed at the TWA airline office.  The two explosions were claimed by the October Third group, an Armenian organization, in a phone call to the press. The caller termed the attacks retaliation for a scheme planned by American intelligence against a defense lawyer for Armenians who was assaulted in Geneva several days ago.  A total of seven people were injured in the attacks.
CYPRUS.  A car bomb explosion in Limassol maimed Hamid Hindi, 52, a Syrian editor and publisher who once served briefly in his nation's Cabinet.  Police arrested a man with a Canadian passport as a suspect. He had been seen loitering suspiciously outside Hindi's home a few hours before the explosion.  Authorities identified the suspect as Moshe Antoine Bavli, an Israeli of French origin and a Swiss resident. There is speculation in the press that he is in reality an Israeli agent, avenging the New Year's Eve bombing of the Jewish-owned hotel in Nairobi, Kenya.  The Kenyan government had accused a Moroccan citizen who was also a member of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP), and it is presumed that the car bombing was a swift move by the Israeli secret service to attack that organization. Hindi, during his time in the Syrian cabinet, was considered one of the founders of the PFLP.
FRANCE.  A bomb exploded in the car of Ahmet Erdeyli, the financial adviser of the Turkish Embassy in Paris.  He escaped without injury. An investigation by French officials showed that the explosion was caused by a hand grenade placed under the front fender of the car. The Alex Yenikomeshian Commando of the Armenian Secret Army claimed reponsibility for the attack (Armenia - stated that diplomat was heavily wounded.)
UNITED STATES.  San Francisco, California.  A bomb exploded at an Iranian bank in San Francisco, shattering windows and damaging the wall of the building where the explosive was planted.  No injuries were reported at the Bank Melli Iran and no arrests were made.  A caller from the the Jewish Defense League claimed credit for the attack, stating that it was in protest for the persecution of Iranian Jewry. Later a man called the media claiming that the American Revenge Committee, formed to take revenge against Iran for the treatment of the former hostages, was responsible.  The caller claimed the group would continue bombing Iranian targets and threatened to kill Khomeini supporters.  FBI investigators took the threats seriously because the caller gave certain authenticators indicating intimate knowledge of the bombing.
UNITED STATES.  Los Angeles, California.  Los Angeles police dismantled a bomb discovered on the doorstep of the Swiss consulate. A man with a foreign accent had called the Associated Press earlier and warned there was a bomb in the building.  Ninety minutes later he called again identifying himself as Operation Three, and stating, We don't want to explode it ...  they have to release our friend. The editor of an Armenian newspaper published in Los Angeles said it evidently was linked to the case of an Armenian nationalist being held by Swiss authorities as a suspected terrorist bomber.  An Armenian group calling itself October 3 has claimed responsibility for the bombing of a number of Swiss government and commercial buildings throughout Europe in recent months.  The group has been seeking the release of Alex Yenikomeshian, who was with a Canoga Park woman in a Geneva hotel when a bomb they were apparently assembling went off, injuring the woman.  The woman, identified as Suzy Mahseredjian, was released by a Swiss court and allowed to return to the United States after she was accused of affiliation with the Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia. In November, 1987, Vicken Tcharkhutian admitted in federal court that he had built the weapons used in this attack.  Tcharkhutian is a member of ASALA.
FRANCE.  Three mail bombs, postmarked from Spain, exploded in the homes of three Romanian dissidents, a writer, a former interior minister, and an engineer.  The exiled Romanians, writer Paul Goma, former minister Nicolas Penescu, and engineer, Serbran Orasco, each received a package containing two books by former Soviet premier Khrushchev, to which explosive devices were wired.  Goma was suspicious, threw his package into the bathroom and called the police.  A bomb-detonating expert touched the package whereupon it exploded; he received slight hand injuries.  Penescu was seriously injured in an identical attack and was taken to the hospital with face, hand, and torso injuries.  He is a member of the National Romanian Council in Exile.  Orasco, in Cologne, opened his identical package and received mild injuries when it exploded.The packages were undeniably from the same source.  In addition, the three Romanians had all attended the Conference on Security and Cooperation recently held in Madrid.  Presumably, they had been targeted there during a press conference they held afterwards.  All three of them were known for their exposure of human rights violations in their home country.  Goma stated that he had received numerous death threats in Romanian since his exile three years ago.  He believed the bombs to be the work of the Romanian secret police.  French police authorities say that in their opinion the bombs were not meant to kill but to intimidate.
LEBANON.  An armed attack on an official car of the Iraqi embassy in Beirut was claimed by Eagles of the Revolution.
FRANCE.  The embassy of South Yemen in Paris was blasted by two rockets which were set in launchers with timers and fired from the courtyard of a neighboring apartment house.  The perpetrators claimed to represent the victims of a bomb attack on a Paris synagogue in October 1980.  An anonymous telephone call, pamphlets found near the embassy, and the words Remember Copernic daubed on a nearby wall showed that the raid was intended as a reprisal for the death of four persons in that bomb blast on the Rue Copernic.  South Yemen was implicated because the one man linked to the affair was traced to an alleged Palestinian training camp in that country.  In Aden, the Marxist government accused agents of imperialism and Zionism for the attack and demanded that the French government apprehend those responsible.  The blast tore into the first floor of the embassy, causing serious structural damage.
SPAIN.  In a bid for national attention, three commando groups of hooded Basque guerrillas kidnapped three honorary consuls from their homes in northern Spain.  The three men abducted were representatives of Austria, Uruguay and El Salvador.  In reaction to the alleged torture death by police of a jailed Basque terrorist suspect, ETA/PM, the political-military wing of Basque Fatherland and Liberty, demanded that various sectors of the media should publicize an Amnesty International report on alleged police torture of prisoners in Spain, a report by the Human Rights Commission of the Basque Parliament on alleged mistreatment of prisoners by police and 18 photos of the separatist guerrilla allegedly tortured to death by police in Madrid.  One week later and just five days after the attempted rightist military coup in the Spanish Parliament, the guerrillas released the consuls and declared a cease-fire in its fight against the Spanish government in order to allow political forces to work out problems in the region.  The moderate political wing of the ETA said it was asking the ETA military wing to go along with the moratorium on terrorism.  It was not clear whether the separatists released the hostages because they felt their demands had been satisfied or because of the coup attempt.
LEBANON.  Unidentified gunmen fired grenades at the U.S. embassy in a coordinated attack against the Sudanese, U.S. and Egyptian embassies.  Egyptian president Anwar Sadat had just taken part in a meeting the day before with Sudanese president Gaafar Nimeiri, and had made his first move towards rejoining Arab ranks since the Arab-Israeli peace treaty.  There were no injuries.
PAKISTAN.  Three armed hijackers seized a Pakistani International Boeing 720 while it was on a flight between Karachi and Peshawar, near the border of Soviet-occupied Afghanistan.  They were believed to be members of Al Zulfikar, a group of pro-Bhutto extremists.  Zia ul-Haq, presently in power in Pakistan, became president after toppling Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, who was executed in 1979.The hijackers held 141 people as hostage, including three Americans, two U.S.  residents, and 11 crew members.  The hijackers demanded that Pakistan release at least 70 political prisoners and relatives of leftists or there would be serious consequences.  They threatened to kill the passengers one by one and blow up the plane.  The plane landed in Kabul, Afghanistan, where one diplomat, Tariq Rahim, was shot and his body dumped unceremoniously on the runway.  The shooting took place during a beating incident and may not have been premeditated.  Rahim was Pakistan's diplomat to Teheran.  He was a former aide to Bhutto and suspected of complicity in the 1977 coup that installed Zia as president.  The leader of the hijackers, a Pakistani identified later as Salamullah Khan, said he was prepared to release the women and children if the government of Pakistan would apologize publicly for saying that he belonged to the outlawed Pakistan People's Party.  Twenty nine hostages--women, children and sick men--were released on March 7 in Kabul.Without warning, the plane with more than 100 hostages still on board flew to Damascus, Syria, on March 9 where the terrorists reopened negotiations with Syrian officials and Pakistan's ambassador to Syria. Pakistani officials had agreed to release only 20 political prisoners. On March 12, the Pakistani government agreed to release 55 prisoners; Libya agreed to receive the hijackers and the released prisoners.  In addition, the hijackers also asked for $50,000.  The Pakistanis quickly agreed to that demand.  The leader of the hijackers also asked that a few members of their families be allowed to stay behind in Pakistan to sell any family houses or land, with a promise from Islamabad government that they would be allowed to leave Pakistan freely once their holdings had been liquidated.  Once again, the Pakistanis agreed.The Pakistani prisoners were rounded up and put on a plane headed for Libya.  Enroute, however, Libya inexplicably reversed its original acceptance of the hijackers.  On March 15, after a 13-day siege, Syria agreed to give them asylum with their political prisoners.  The hijackers surrendered as the plane returning from Libya with the 54 political prisoners (one could not be located) was flown to Syria.  There, the hostages were released unharmed.  The hijackers surrendered to Syrian authorities.The admitted victory for the three hijackers brought a storm of criticism from the US and Pakistan for the part played in the negotiations by the Soviets and Afghanistan.  Some officials suggested that the Soviets' lack of action could have been from the fact that the hijackers, political foes of Zia, were almost certainly supported by the Soviet-installed  regime of Karmal in Kabul.   This assessment ascertained that not only did the Kabul regime  support the hijackers' aims, but may have smuggled automatic weapons aboard the aircraft when it was in Kabul.   Hostages later reported they arrived with pistols and left with machine guns.
LEBANON.  Three gunmen in a speeding car and using silencers on their weapons shot and killed an Iranian student leader as he walked on a Beirut street.  Mohammad Saleh, president of the Iranian Student Association, was the second president of the Association to be killed since the beginning of the Iranian-Iraqi war.
COSTA RICA.  A civil guard discovered an unexploded grenade at the residence of the Nicaraguan ambassador, Dr.  Javier Chamorro Mora.
COSTA RICA.  Terrorists launched rockets from a speeding car at a U.S. government van carrying marines to guard duty at the American Embassy in San Jose.  Three marines and two other persons were injured.  The Commander Carlos Aguero Echeverria Command, named for a Costa Rican who died fighting alongside Nicaragua's Sandinist guerrillas against the Somoza regime, claimed responsibility and called the latest attacks reprisals against American and Honduran support for El Salvador's civilian-military junta. In late April, three of the terrorists were arrested.  They belong to the Costa Rican group called the People's Avant-Garde Organization. The organization is at least two years old and is made up of commando groups independent of each other.
EL SALVADOR.  More than a dozen men in three groups attacked the U.S. Embassy building with machine gun fire and self-propelled grenades, but no one was injured.  Two groups of men each fired on the building from opposite ends as a diversionary tactic while a third group fired a Chinese-made rocket-propelled grenade which damaged the building severely.  The clandestine People's Liberation Forces (FPL) claimed credit for the attack with the purpose of repudiating the United States' direct intervention in the Salvadoran conflict.  The charge d'affaires, Frank Chapin, was not in the embassy.  He has been the highest ranking diplomat in El Salvador since President Reagan removed Ambassador Robert White from the office.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  A bomb exploded at a U.S. Army security office in Giessen, 35 miles north of Frankfurt, causing about $50,000 damage.  No one was reported injured.  Letters claiming responsibility for the attack linked the incidents with supporters of jailed members of the Red Army Faction who were staging a hunger strike at the time for improved prison conditions.
LEBANON.  The French Embassy in Beirut was attacked by rockets during the night.  The Mujaheddin Saff (The Warriors) claimed responsibility for the attack and said it was to protest France's sale of Mirage jets to Iraq, with whom the Iranians are warring.
GREECE.  Firebombs exploded under four automobiles belonging to Americans assigned to the U.S.  Air Force facility at Athens airport. The bombs were placed under vehicles in four different residential areas of the city.  There were no casualties, only material damage.
EL SALVADOR.  The U.S.  Embassy was attacked by unidentified individuals for the sixth time in the past month.  Eyewitnesses near the embassy reported that guerrillas fired heavy-caliber weapons at the building for several minutes.  Embassy security forces pursued the attackers and presumably wounded one of the guerrillas.
GUATEMALA.  The Japanese Embassy in Guatemala City was attacked by unidentified gunmen.  The embassy was vacant save for police guards on duty.
GUATEMALA.  For the second time in a month guerrillas have attacked the French oil-drilling company in Rubelsalto owned by ELF Aquitaine. Saboteurs planted and detonated explosives at the pipeline used to transport the pumped crude oil.  The company is carrying out the necessary repairs to reestablish normal production.
FRANCE.  A previously unknown group, the Jewish group Pessach (Passover) claimed responsibility for shots fired during the night at the Syrian Airlines office in central Paris.  In a telephoned statement to AFP, Pessach stated that the attack was a reply to Syrian persecutions of Jews and the massacre of Christians in Libya.  The movement also claimed responsibility for shots fired a week earlier at an extreme right-wing bookshop also in central Paris.  There were no casualties reported in either incident.  On May 13, three members of the Pessah group were arrested.  They claimed the attack on the bookshop was motivated by a recent desecration of a Jewish cemetery in France.  The three were traced through the licence plate number of their car, taken down by a passer-by.
ITALY.  Pope John Paul II was shot and seriously wounded as he drove through crowds gathered for his weekly public audience in St.  Peter's Square in Vatican City.  Police arrested an escaped Turkish terrorist who was identified as Mehmet Ali Agca, 23.  Two women standing by were injured, one seriously.  The Pope recovered from his wounds after two operations. The assailant apparently hoped to strike at Soviet and U.S. imperialism but the connection to the Pope was not made clear.  He escaped from a Turkish prison shortly before the Pope arrived in Turkey in 1979 where he had made death threats against the Pope.  He had been convicted of the assassination of a prominent Turkish editor in the wave of terrorism that subsequently led to a military takeover, and had been sentenced to death.In July 1981, after a three-day trial, Agca was sentenced to life imprisonment by an Italian court in Rome.  The first year of that sentence was to be spent in solitary confinement.  When read the sentence in his jail cell because he had boycotted the court proceedings on the grounds that the Italian courts could not prosecute him for a crime committed in the Vatican, Agca showed no sign of emotion and told his Italian lawyer that he did not wish to appeal.  He will be eligible to be freed after serving 28 years of his life sentence.  Contrary to the hopes of many, the speedy trial did not serve to answer the questions of motive, and whether Agca had acted alone or had been part of a conspiracy in the assassination attempt.  The court had refused to admit any psychiatric evidence but the overriding impression of Agca was of a fanatic, though as one Turkish journalist stated, Agca likes to play the fanatic, but he's not really like that at all.   High-ranking Turkish officials are convinced that Agca did not act alone but have not been able to identify any accomplices.On August 10, 1982, Italian authorities were expected to file charges against several people suspected of helping Mehmet Ali Agca in his assassination attempt.  Investigators were expected to go to Switzerland and then possibly West Germany, Austria, and Spain to gather information.  Authorities would give no details but said they are continuing to investigate links between Agca, who is Turkish, and a gun-smuggling ring operating in Bulgaria and Turkey.  On November 25, 1982, Serge Ivanov Antonov, an employee of the Bulgarian national airline and tourist office in Rome, was arrested and charged with complicity in the shooting.  There have been no indications of an international plot.  The Bulgarian Communist government demanded the release of the suspect stating that his arrest was groundless and a hostile act against Soviet-aligned Bulgaria.  However, Italian authorities content there were two other gunmen in St. Peter's Square ready to shoot the Pope; Antonov's companion has not been identified.In September 1996 the Turkish gunman made a plea to Italy asking to be pardoned from his life sentence there and to be moved to a prison in Turkey.
UNITED STATES.  New York.  Another mid-Manhattan office building was evacuated while police removed a bomb from the Honduran Consulate.  The bomb had been mailed and was defused when suspicious employees called authorities.  The nine-inch pipe bomb was similar to three discovered at Pan American World Airways.  Authorities suspect the same group called the Puerto Rican Armed Resistance.
TURKEY.  Four leftist gunmen hijacked a Turkish Airlines DC-9 en route from Istanbul to Ankara as it left Yesilkoy International Airport.  They ordered the pilot to land at the small military airfield at Burgas in Bulgaria. The hijackers demanded $500,000 and freedom for 47 prisoners in Turkish jails.  They threatened to kill five American banking executives among the 112 passengers aboard and also to blow up the plane if their demands were not met.  Twenty-five women, children, and men with chronic ailments were allowed to leave the plane at Burgas, a resort city on the Black Sea, leaving 91 passengers still in the plane, plus a crew of six.  The Turkish government refused to negotiate and asked Bulgaria to keep the plane from leaving Burgas.Two passengers escaped by jumping from the plane through an emergency exit. Bulgarian officials maintained contact with the hijackers by radio.  The hijackers threatened to kill the five American passengers if their demands were not met by a specified time.  This deadline was extended, then finally abandoned.  The hijackers then asked for 200 envelopes and a quantity of paper so that the hostages could write farewell letters.  The Turkish government continued to refuse to accede to the demands of the terrorists and threatened to execute the 47 jailed leftists if the hijackers carried out their threat to blow up the plane.Twenty-four hours later, on May 25, a dramatic end came to the hijacking. Two of the terrorists were lured from the plane by the promise that they could make a statement to the press.  Once on the ground, they were immediately overpowered.  In an escape set up by hand signals, the pilot of the jetliner sent the plane lurching forward, knocking everyone standing in the plane off their feet.  Some of the passengers then took advantage of the confusion to overpower the two gunmen left.  One terrorist lost his weapon and either jumped or was thrown from the plane.  All 91 passengers were freed.  Five incurred minor injuries when one of the attacked hijackers began to shoot his pistol wildly.  Two of the hijackers were also wounded.The gunmen were identified as members of an extremist Marxist group, Dev Sol, whose members had been severely cracked down on by the Turkish military authorities.  The latter had seized power in September 1980, saying the elected government had been unable to quell violence between the left and right.  Since then, thousands of suspected political extremists have been arrested.
FRANCE.  A bomb exploded outside the Armenian Cultural Center in Paris, killing the caretaker of an adjacent building.  The attack was claimed a few days later by the Turkish Islamic Revolutionary Army.  The anti- Armenian attack was unprecedented in Paris, but officials noted, may be due to the recent Armenian terrorist attacks against Turkish diplomats.  One Armenian official noted that the bomb was set probably to mark the anniversary date of the creation of the Republic of Armenia on May 28, 1918.  Armenian was later divided between Turkey and the Soviet Union in 1920.
BELGIUM.  An unidentified gunman shot and killed the Brussels representative of the Palestinian Liberation Organization outside of his residence--an attack that provoked a sharp verbal exchange between the PLO and the Israeli Embassy in Belgium.  The PLO accused the Israelis of killing Naim Khader, 41, a key figure in relations between Western Europe and the Arab world.  The Israelis denied the allegation, stating that We know the various Palestinian movements kill each other. Khader was unpopular with extremist Palestinians because he favored limited compromise.The gunman was described as dark-skinned with a mustache.  He fired six bullets at Khader at close range, and although bystanders pursued him, he escaped in a waiting car.
ISRAEL.  Two bombs were found in a national park near Dimona.  Bomb squad experts detonated the explosives.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  A bomb set off by suspected antimilitary terrorists ripped through a half-finished NATO arms depot southwest of Hanover, causing an estimated $130,000 in damage.  There were no injuries. This was the fourth such attack this year against US military targets. Terrorists linked to the Red Army Faction were suspected.
BELGIUM.  A series of violent incidents in Brussels were linked to disturbances by ethnic Albanian nationalists in Yugoslavia's Kosovo Province earlier in the year.  Belgian authorities reported numerous threats made against Yugoslavian citizens as well as fires at the Yugoslav airline and tourist office in Brussels.
PERU.  Unidentified persons threw two powerful explosives at the Chinese Embassy from the window of their speeding car.  There were no injuries but the guard forces at the building were put on alert.
UNITED STATES.  The death of a Libyan student in Ogden, Utah, was declared by the FBI to be politically motivated.  Investigators claimed that positive indications had developed that linked the killing to internal Libyan politics.  A suspect, another Libyan student, was arrested in connection with the death of Nabil Abuzed Mansour who had been discovered in the trunk of his automobile, shot five times at close range.  The suspect, Mohamed Shabata, was arrested in Chicago, Illinois as he prepared to board a flight for London on his way to Tripoli.  Authorities believe that the killing is connected to other assassinations of Libyan exiles.
SWITZERLAND.  In its third bombing in three days, the Ninth of June Organization claimed credit for an explosion which ripped through a department store in Lausanne, injuring twenty people.  The injuries were mainly to women shoppers in the women's wear department but none were serious.  The explosion caused heavy damage to the store.  The Swiss authorities speculated that the bombings were in response to the arrest of an Armenian militant suspected of the assassination of a Turkish consulate employee.
GREECE.  The Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine claimed responsibility for the gun and bomb attack on a Piraeus shipping and travel agency in which 2 people were killed and 70 injured.  The Popular Front said the agency was serving as a front organization for Israeli intelligence interests and was involved in the killing of one of the Palestinian group's members.  The two killed were Evgenia Angelikoussi, owner of the agency and an associate, Dimitrios Malatasis.  The PFLP insisted that Angelikoussi was a member of Mossad, the Israeli intelligence agency. The next day the PLO Liaison and Information Bureau in Athens disclaimed responsibility for the attack.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  A Romanian-born employee of the U.S.-financed Radio Free Europe was stabbed outside his home.  He survived the attack. Authorities said the motive for the attack was unclear.  The victim was identified as Emil Georgescu, 51, supervising program editor in the station's Romanian service.  Local police arrested the attacker and an accomplice--both French citizens.  Mrs. Georgescu identified the attacker.
LEBANON.  In the Syrian-controlled area of west Beirut, there were several attacks against French interests, including a bombing at an Air France airlines office.  Some sources suspect Abu Nidal's Syrian backed group, Al Assifa, because of France's efforts to mediate the PLO question.
BELGIUM.  An early morning shooting at a Brussels cafe resulted in the death of an accountant and the wounding of a porter.  Both were employees of the Yugoslav embassy.  The killer escaped.  The attack was claimed by an Albanian independence movement, which declared the purpose of its act was to avenge our thousands of Albanian brothers pursued and persecuted in Kosovo.  On March 18, 1982, however, Musi Hoti, a Yugoslav national born in Kosovo but who had been living in Brussels for several years, was arrested for the murder of the accountant Stojan Djeric, and wounding the bodyguard, Redzo Zuko.  There is a question about whether or not there was a political motivation in the shooting or whether it was really just a barroom fight.
UNITED STATES.  Twenty-four people claiming to be members of the Mujahedeen Khalq took over the Iranian interests section of the Algerian embassy and held six hostages for less than an hour before police broke the siege. Three people were injured in the takeover, including one person who was shot.
ISRAEL.  The PLO claimed responsibility for the planting of several bombs near the entrance to the Wailing Wall in Jerusalem and near the town of Neve Ya' Acov.  The boobytrapped bombs were successfully detonated by Israeli security personnel in a safe location.
LIBYA.  Explosives were discovered aboard a Middle East Airlines plane when it landed in Tripoli.  Militant Shi'ites are suspected because of similar actions perpetrated to protest the disappearance of their leader during a visit to Libya in 1978.
FRANCE.  An explosion in the early morning hours in front of the Alitalia Airline office on the Champs Elysee in Paris broke the front window but caused no injuries.  A call to the French news agency by an unidentified caller claimed the Armenian Movement 3 October was responsible for the bombing.
COLOMBIA.  A tin can filled with dynamite exploded in the men's room of the U.S.-run Colombo-American Institute in Barranquilla.  No injuries were reported.
LEBANON.  A bomb exploded in an empty Middle East Airlines Boeing 720. There were no casualties.  Lebanese officials suspected that the device was planted by Lebanese Shi'ite groups protesting the 1978 disappearance of their leader, Iranian-born Imam Musa Sadr, while on a visit in Libya.
PERU.  In a bombing campaign directed against U.S. firms in Lima, the local offices of the Ford Motor Company was bombed, as was the Bank of America, the Coca-Cola Company and the G. Berckemeyer Co. (representative of the Carnation Company).  Sendero Luminoso was suspected.
UNITED STATES.  A flare was fired at the Long Island home of the Soviet ambassador to the United Nations.  Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko was a guest at the time in the ambassador's home.  Later in November (see November 14, 1981) a teenager was arrested and charged with the attack after several similar actions were carried out against Soviet interests and were claimed by the Jewish Defense League.
UNITED STATES.  New York.  A car belonging to a Nigerian diplomat was firebombed.  There were no injuries and little damage.  The car was parked at the Soviet U.N. mission and it was believed that the bomb was aimed at the Soviets.  The Thunder of Zion branch of the Jewish Defense League claimed responsibility for the act but a later call from the JDL denied responsibility for the bombing but applauded it.
COLOMBIA.  A bomb was set off at the Venezuelan Consulate in a residential district of northern Bogota.  There was only minor damage.  The Workers' Self-Defense Movement claimed credit for the explosion.
PERU.  During another wave of bombings in Lima, one of the targets was a textile firm with U.S. connections.  Sendero Luminoso was suspected.
UNITED STATES.  New York.  An anti-Castro terrorist group claimed responsibility for the bombing of the Mexican consular building six blocks from the United Nations.  There were no injuries from the early morning blast but severe damage.  A man claiming to be a member of Omega-7 called a Spanish radio station 15 minutes after the explosion to take responsibility for the blast.  He identified himself as Omar, an Omega Commando.
DENMARK.  A group calling itself the Sixth Armenian Liberation Army called the Danish media and claimed responsibility for an explosion during the night at the Turkish Airlines Office in Copenhagen.  Two people were injured in the attack, one of them seriously.  The offices were severely damaged.  A man was seen shortly before the explosion placing two plastic bags outside the building.  Only one of the bags containing explosives went off.  The second bomb was detonated by army experts. (ASALA claimed in Armenia, in name of Martyr Hagop Darakjian Commando, with one death.)
IRAN.  A bomb damaged the doors and windows of a Swiss Embassy building in Tehran and an Armenian group claimed responsibility.  No one was hurt in the explosion.  The Ninth of June Organization has been targeting Swiss interests to obtain the release of one of their members.
LEBANON.  The fourth terrorist bomb in as many days exploded in a crowded movie theater in the Moslem section of west Beirut, killing at least four people and wounding 36 others.  As in the other bombings, the Front for the Liberation of Lebanon from Foreigners claimed responsibility for the attack in a telephone call to AFP.  The caller said that this operation of ours is to prove to the PLO that we are not a fictitious group and all the threats in the world against us will remain fictitious, a statement which possibly referred to the PLO's assertion that the group was merely a fictitious front for Israeli operations.
PERU.  Four hooded men evidently attempting to toss explosives at the Chilean Embassy in Lima were taken by surprise during the night as their car approached the Embassy grounds.  A police car patrolling the area gave pursuit but was unable to apprehend the terrorists.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  Three cars were set on fire while they were parked within a U.S. Army housing area in Stuttgart.  One car was completely destroyed.  Two other cars were damaged.  No injuries were reported.
LEBANON.  A Mercedes-Benz parked near a restaurant in a south Lebanon village exploded killing 15 people and injuring at least 40 others, mainly pedestrians.  The car exploded a short distance from a checkpoint where two militia units were searching for explosive devices.  Witnesses said several guerrillas manning the checkpoint were victims in the blast. Similar bombings in the past month have been claimed by the Front for the Liberation of Lebanon from Foreigners, a rightist group intent on freeing Lebanon of Palestinian and Syrian troops.
SWITZERLAND.  Two bombs went off in the center of Geneva and Armenian extremists claimed responsibility.  The police said one person was injured slightly and some shop windows were shattered.  The explosive devices were set off at the entrance of the main post office and at the city courthouse, where a member of the Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia is to be tried for murder.  A caller to the Geneva bureau of Agence France- Presse said the bombs were placed by the June 9 Organization.
TURKEY.  Anti-Khomeini forces shot up and ransacked the Iranian consulate in Istanbul to protest the mounting number of executions and oppressions of the Khomeini regime.  Three people were wounded in the shooting during the seizure.  The 26 masked Iranians, said to be students, held the consulate for about 50 minutes before Turkish police surrounded the building and broke the seige.  The Consul General and eight staff members had been taken hostage at gunpoint and led to the basement, while the dissidents threw out furniture and caused extensive damage to the interior of the consulate.
ITALY.  At about the same time as a bombing at El Al airlines office, there was a powerful bomb explosion in a busy square in Ostia, west of Rome, where thousands of Soviet Jews live, waiting for visas to the United States and other Western countries.  Five people, two of them Soviet Jews, three of them Italians, were injured in the attack on the square where the Jews traditionally gather in the evening to chat.  Officials believe the attack was timed to coincide with Yom Kippur, the Jewish Day of Atonement.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  Bombs exploded at two different Yugoslav restaurants in Munich within a few hours of each other.  Police suspect that the bombs were planted in protest against the recent murder of a Croatian exile living in Munich.  Two people were injured in the bombings and there was an estimated $50,000 in damage.
BELGIUM.  A bomb exploded in a truck near a synagogue in the heart of the diamond center in Antwerp shortly before a scheduled Jewish ceremony in a tremendous blast that killed four people and injured 95 others.  The bomb had been planted in a delivery truck parked the night before.  It was parked illegally but a wheel had been removed as if it had broken down. The blast heavily damaged buildings in the thriving diamond district of Antwerp's Jewish quarter.  An anonymous caller told the Belgian news agency Belga the attack was carried out by the Group of Direct Action, Belgian Section. This refers to the French group which has never before perpetrated an action outside French borders.  A caller claiming to be from Direct Action called the French press and disclaimed the incident entirely.The next day the attack was claimed by a caller speaking for Black September.  The caller said that three more bomb attacks were planned for Belgium.  He ended the call shouting several times Palestine will conquer.On the same feast day last year, a bomb attached to a parked motorbike exploded in Paris outside a synagogue on the Rue Copernic, killing four people. (See October 3, 1980) Other similarities with the Paris synagogue attack and the Antwerp one appeared when the owner of the van was traced. The van had been purchased only a few days earlier by a Nicolas Brazzi from a used car dealer.  Brazzi, and his female companion who could speak some French, were traced to a Brussels hotel, where he registered claiming Cypriot nationality, just as was claimed by the owner, Panadryu, of the motorbike which blew up outside the Paris synagogue.
ITALY.  Bombs exploded outside the offices in Rome of Reader's Digest, the Bank of America and the Avis Rental Car Company. Callers to newspapers and news agencies claimed responsibility for the bombings in the name of the Communist Groups for Proletarian Internationalism, a previously unknown group.
ITALY.  A bomb exploded in Rome outside the offices of the Guatemalan government.  The blast caused no injuries and was claimed by the Communist Groups for Proletarian Internationalism.
FRANCE.  An explosion in a booby-trapped car on the Champs-Elysees in Paris destroyed the parked car but injured no one.  The explosion was in front of a fashionable snack and shop establishment called Le Drugstore.  A series of similar attacks during the following week baffled police.  Some of the attacks were claimed by a mysterious Liberation Army of Canaque, but the militant separatists of New Caledonia denied responsibility.  A new group called September-France (perhaps an Armenian group protesting the arrest of four Armenians after the takeover of the Turkish consulate on September 24) also claimed credit for many of the attacks.  Authorities also suspect the extreme right and Action Directe.  (ASALA listed this incident in its chronology of actions in Armenia)
COSTA RICA.  A small plane with 26 passengers and three crewmembers was hijacked by five Nicaraguan rightists demanding the release of six Nicaraguans convicted of trying to blow up a Costa Rican radio station that they said broadcast propaganda for the leftist rulers of Nicaragua.  The plane was taken over during a domestic flight and was held at the Juan Santamaria Airport in Costa Rica.  Four Americans were listed aboard the plane.  Shortly after landing, the hijackers released eight passengers, including women, children and two sick passengers.  The group, called the Nicaraguan Anti-Communist Democratic Movement released a communique listing the names of the prisoners to be released within 4 hours, and declared that noncompliance with their demands would result in the execution of one hostage for each hour past the deadline.  They also requested fuel and a navigation map of South America.The six prisoners were surrendered to the hijackers and the remaining hostages were freed except for the pilot.  He was forced under pain of death to fly them to an undisclosed location.  The pilot returned with his empty plane four hours later.  Later, in El Salvador, the eleven fugitives were arrested on an isolated air strip near San Miguel.  A Salvadoran military spokesman said the hijackers, who were believed to be three men and two women, were detained along with the freed prisoners in El Salvador pending extradition proceedings.  Later in mid-November El Salvador denied the extradition request.
FRANCE.  A bomb exploded at Paris' Gare de Lyon train station injuring at least one person and destroying more than two dozen luggage lockers. Officials said the explosion occurred in an underground level of the station, which houses the suburban subway line.  Later, the attack was claimed by the previously unknown Orly Organization, an Armenian group.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  The Yugoslav cultural center was bombed in Stuttgart.  Albanian nationalists were suspected.
FRANCE.  A bomb slightly damaged an automobile parked near the Eiffel Tower. Moments after the blast, which injured no one, the Orly group, an Armenian organization telephoned AFP in Beirut and Paris and claimed responsibility for the incident.  The Paris caller said the explosion was the first warning.
LEBANON.  The Banque Libano Francaise and the Union des Assurances de Paris were bombed in East Beirut.  Damage was extensive but there were no injuries.  The attacks were claimed by the Orly Organization. (ASALA later listed in its chronology of Orly actions in Armenia, the bombing of the Fransa Bank in Zouk Michael, Beirut; the bombing of the Banque Union de Paris in Bourj Hamoud, Beirut.)
FRANCE.  A bomb placed in a luggage locker exploded in the Gare de l'Est railway terminal, wounding two people.  Thirty lockers were destroyed. Responsibility for the attack was claimed by the Orly Group of Armenian extremists.
FRANCE.  Responsibiliity for a fire bomb attack that destroyed two Soviet Embassy vehicles parked on a Paris street was claimed by Ukrainian nationalists.  The caller claimed to be a member of a group called Bandera, a reference to Etienne Bandera, a Ukrainian nationalist who was active in the 1930s, and was murdered.  He said the attack was to commemorate the rebirth of Ukraine.
ANGOLA.  The Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) bombed a Belgian-owned oil refinery in Luanda as a part of its struggle to destroy the economic base of the current Marxist government which counts on oil production for 80% of its foreign exchange earnings.  The sabotage team managed to destroy one of the three distillation units, an act which is expected to put the refinery out of operation for at least two months.
VENEZUELA.  A group of eleven, hooded, armed terrorists claiming to be Puerto Rican independence fighters and backers of El Salvador's leftist guerrillas hijacked three Venezuelan airliners with more than 260 people on board in a meticulously planned and executed operation.  In a 30-hour ordeal which ended in Cuba, the planes traveled from Venezuela to Honduras, Guatemala, Colombia, Panama for refueling and the release of some 130 of the passengers, mainly women and children in exchange for maps of Central America, food, medical supplies and fuel.There was confusion as to the actual identity of the hijackers--one referred to the group as members of the Ramon Emeterio Betances Puerto Rico Independence Commandos.  Some released passengers stated that they wore armbands El Salvador will win!, and passed out leaflets with the signature of FMLN (Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front), while ground controllers said that one had a Venezuelan accent.  In Caracas, authorities said they believed the gunmen were linked to Venezuela's Red Flag guerrilla group, or Colombia's M-19.  One priest said the terrorists on his plane identified themselves to him as a Salvadoran, a Puerto Rican, and a Venezuelan.  The leaders of each plane's group were known simply as Commandantes 9, 10, and 11.There was also confusion about what the terrorists were demanding.  Each of the respective governments were secretive about their dealings with the terrorists.  Bogota Radio, however, read the group's communique over the air in which they requested the release of several Venezuelan political prisoners being held in Caracas, a ransom of $10 million, and the publication of their communique in the countries of El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Venezuela.In a 1973 hijacking agreement signed with Venezuela, Cuba is obligated to return the three Venezuelan planes, the hijackers and all others aboard. On arrival in Havana, the gunmen were taken into custody by Cuban police, but there was no immediate indication of their fate.  Cuba has stated only that they are under arrest and will be tried in Cuba.
LEBANON.  A bomb exploded near the residence of the newly-arrived French ambassador, killing a man and wounding four others.  The bomb had been hidden in a fruit cart parked in predominantly Moslem West Beirut near the border with East Beirut.  The residence of the French Ambassador Paul March-Henry was not damaged.  His predecessor, Louis Delamare, was killed in September by unidentified gunmen. (See 9/4 incident.)
GUATEMALA.  A member of the security corps of U.S.  Ambassador in Guatemala Frederic Chapin, was killed in a guerrilla ambush by members of the Poor People's Guerrilla Army.  The bodyguard, Maximiliano Sosa Zecena, was Guatemalan.
LEBANON.  A suicide terrorist driving a car packed with explosives sped through machine gun fire into the compound of the Iraqi Embassy causing two explosions which completely demolished the building and resulted in over 100 wounded and at least 61 dead.  The explosion damaged nearby buildings and cars, injuring many within the block.  The Iraqi Ambassador, Abdul Razzak Lafta was among the dead; his body was found 10 days later.The disastrous attack was claimed by the Army for the Liberation of Kurdistan, an area of Iran under Iraqi control.  Another call to AFP claimed responsibility for the attack under the name of the Iraqi Liberation Army - General Command.On December 17, a spokesman for an Iraqi Moslem fundamentalist group, al Dawa, whose name means the call, said his group was responsible for the explosion that destroyed the Iraqi Embassy.
GUATEMALA.  Leftist guerrillas burned the El Salvador Consulate in Guatemala City.  The consulate was completely burned out and all the documents of Salvadoran citizens in Guatemala were destroyed.  At the same time rockets were fired at the police station and the Chamber of Commerce. A previously unknown group, the Roque Dalton Commando, claimed responsibility for the attack.  The name is apparently that of a Salvadoran Communist poet.
TURKEY.  An explosion was reported in the Iraq-Iskenderun pipeline which carries crude oil from Kirkuk to the Mediterranean terminal of Yumurtalik. The explosion occurred 7km from Idil, a town in Mardin Province, and teams were investigating the cause.  Oil was leaking out of the damaged section of the pipeline.  This is an Iraqi pipeline. (See 1/8/82)
TURKEY.  An Iraqi oil pipeline has been cut by an explosion for the second time in a week.  Turkish authorities said the 625-mile pipeline that brings Iraqi oil to Turkey's Mediterranean coast exploded 42 miles inside the Turkish border and sabotage was suspected.  The explosions on Iraqi lines have damaged the country's efforts to increase its oil exports. (see 1/6/82)
FRANCE.  Three bombs exploded nearly simultaneously in Paris.  The attacks were directed against companies with direct relations with East European countries, namely, Poland and the Soviet Union.   There was considerable damage but no injuries.  The attacks were claimed by the Bakounine Gdansk Paris Group, named after a Russian revolutionary anarchist of the mid-1800s.
FRANCE.  The Armenian group, the Orly Organization, claimed credit for an explosion in a branch of the Union of Banks of Paris, as well as the placement of another bomb which was dismantled in time at a branch of the Credit Lyonnaise.  According to the anonymous caller to AFP these two actions were to protest the continued imprisonment of Armenian militants.
ISRAEL.  A bomb exploded outside the main office of West Germany's Lufthansa Airlines in Tel Aviv's seaside hotel district.  The blast broke windows and damaged the building but caused no injuries.  According to police, the incident may be linked to a recent bomb attack on a Jewish restaurant in West Berlin in which 25 people were injured.
ITALY.  A bomb exploded outside the office of the Italian Chamber of Commerce for the United States in Rome leaving a large hole in the floor of the U.S. trade office.  The bomb destroyed a door, shattered windows, and damaged an elevator shaft in the building.  No injuries were reported.  An anonymous caller to the Italian news agency ANSA claimed the bombing was carried out by the Groups of Internationalist Communist.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  The police reported that the explosion of a bomb destroyed the door and several windows of the honorary Salvadoran Consulate building in Cologne.  The explosion did not damage any records or documents.  The police have no clues as to the motive for the attack.
COLOMBIA.  Seven guerrillas hijacked a Colombian 727 jetliner with 128 aboard shortly after takeoff from Bogota's El Dorado Airport on a flight to Pereira, and forced the pilot to return to the Bogota airport.  The heavily-armed hijackers told authorities that they were members of the April 19 Movement (M-19), Colombia's most active rebel group which reportedly received military training in Cuba.  They threatened to blow up the plane if the army moved in, and demanded that a reporter from the Bogota newspaper El Espectador come aboard the plane to take the hijackers' demands to the Colombian authorities.  They also asked to see a member of a peace commission which was set up in 1981 to negotiate an end to guerrilla activities in Colombia.  It is not known if the authorities met any of the demands before the plane flew on to Cali, where the hijackers released 47 of the passengers.  The 727 was damaged during a takeoff from Cali.  In a deal with the Army, the hijackers released the rest of the passengers and crew in return for a light executive plane which flew them to Cuba.
FRANCE.  Bombs exploded at the French headquarters of the U.S. appliance firm Bendix, and an electrical appliance shop selling U.S. products. A group calling itself Bakounine-Gdansk-Paris-Guatemala-Salvador claimed responsibility for the bombings in a communique to a news agency.
FRANCE.  A bomb exploded at a firm importing meat from Argentina.  A group calling itself Bakounine-Gdansk-Paris-Guatemala-Salvador claimed responsibility for the bombings in a communique to a news agency.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  A bomb, planted in a bush near the U.S. cultural center in Berlin, shattered more than three dozen windows. The bulletproof outer windows of the building were not affected by the blast but inner windows were destroyed.  No one assumed responsibility.
UNITED STATES.  A firebomb was thrown and a machine gun fired into a cigar company, El Padron Cigars, which over the years has been the target of five terrorist attacks, but caused only minor damage. The owner of the cigar company, Jose Orlando Padron, has voiced his support of efforts to normalize relations between the U.S. and Cuba.Less than an hour later, unknown gunmen (presumed to belong to Omega- 7) shattered windows at the Hispania Freight Company, which handles shipments to Cuba.  The firm's Hialeah office was also attacked.
TANZANIA. An Air Tanzanian airline Boeing 737 with 99 passengers and crew members on a domestic flight to Dar es Salaam was commandeered by five Tanzanians and forced to land at Nairobi for refueling.  The plane made more refueling stops in Kenya, Jidda, Saudi Arabia, and Athens before landing in Stansted, England.  The English police authorities refused to allow the plane to refuel and take off.  A pregnant woman and a child were freed earlier in the day by the hijackers who demanded the removal of Tanzania's socialist leader, President Julius Nyerere.  They had also released six passengers in Nairobi and two in Athens.  The remaining passengers were believed to be Tanzanians.  One of the freed passengers reported that there were four hijackers armed with pistols, hand grenades and machine guns who said they belonged to the Tanzanian Youth Democratic Movement.  The hijackers threatened to blow up the plane if it was approached.After three days, the hijackers freed the last 90 passengers and surrendered to British police who arrested them.  They accused Nyerere of imposing intolerable economic conditions on their East African nation. Nyerere has been attempting to combine socialism with democracy.  The drama was brought to an end with the intervention of former Tanzanian Foreign Minister Oscar Kambona, an exile, who persuaded the youths to surrender. The youths were remanded by a court to face trial.  On September 18, the five youths were convicted and sentenced to prison terms of between four and eight years.
LEBANON.  Explosives blew up a Lebanese cargo ship at the Palestinian guerrilla-controlled port of Tyre.  The blast occurred despite severe security precautions by local armed elements.  There was no estimate of damage; authorities noted that the ship had been followed for quite a while into Lebanese waters by an Israeli gunboat.  The Israeli military denied any responsibility for the attack.
SUDAN.  U.S. intelligence has what it calls physical evidence of a Libyan plot to kill several hundred Americans living in the Sudanese capital of Khartoum.  According to an official account, two bombs disguised as stereo speakers, each packed with more than 40 pounds of plastique explosive, were to have been planted in the dance hall in the American recreation club in Khartoum and set to go off over a weekend when the hall would be full of American diplomats, workers, and their families.  Fortunately, the bombs were discovered in Nairobi, en route to Khartoum.  U.S. government sources say that Libyan intelligence officers working out of Kenya prepared the bombs and personally assured that the bombs were boarded on a flight to Khartoum.
LEBANON.  The second secretary of the British embassy, a Lebanese British subject, Mohammed al-Mikdad, was kidnapped in Beirut and later released. The family did not say who the abductors were or if the $150,000 ransom demanded by them was paid.  Lebanese authorities viewed the incident as another in a series of recent terrorist actions aimed at diplomats.
GREECE.  Two cars belonging to U.S. military personnel and displaying U.S. military license plates were bombed in Thessalonika.  The cars were destroyed; no injuries were reported.  No group claimed responsibility.
UNITED STATES.  A Cambridge, Mass., import shop owned by Orhan Gunduz, honorary Turkish consul general, was bombed, causing severe damage. Police stated a caller claiming to represent an Armenian nationalist group had claimed credit.  Such a group has spread a reign of terror by assassinating Turkish officials in the United States.  The Justice Commandos of the Armenian Genocide contend that the Turks massacred over a million Armenians in Turkey in 1915 and drove hundreds of thousands more into exile.  The group demands reparation for the relatives plus an acknowledgment from the Turkish government that it is responsible for the crime.
LEBANON.  ASALA claimed credit for the bombing of a movie theater in the Armenian section of Beirut which caused two deaths and more than 16 injuries.  ASALA said the movie theater frequently featured films either made in Turkey or spoken in Turkish.
ITALY.  A Jewish-owned clothing store was bombed about a half-mile away from where a bomb squad defused a plastic explosive at El Al.  Investigators were unable to link the two incidents. No group or person claimed responsibility for either attack.
ARGENTINA.  An explosion in a U.S.-owned bank in Buenos Aires caused some damage.
HONDURAS.  Gunmen in a speeding taxi raked the U.S. embassy building in Tegucigalpa with pistol and submachine gun fire, causing minor damage but no injuries.  An embassy spokesman said the attack caused minor damage to the office of the U.S.  Agency for International Development and the embassy's communication unit.
CANADA.  Kani Gungor, a commercial counselor at the Turkish embassy in Ottawa, was seriously wounded by gunmen in the parking garage of his town- house. In Beirut, Lebanon, the Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia assumed responsibility in a call to the media.  A letter from the group was also mailed to the media in Los Angeles, California. It reinforced the claim in the name of the Zaven Abedian Commando Group of ASALA.  The attack prompted Canadian authorities to improve security measures at the U.S., French, and Swiss embassies.  All three countries had Armenians in custody for attacks on Turkish targets.
ISRAEL.  An American-born Jew, Alan Goodman from Tenafly, New Jersey, wearing an Israeli army uniform, sprayed Islam's Dome of the Rock shrine with automatic rifle fire, killing two Arabs and touching off some of the worst Arab rioting in Jerusalem since Israel captured and annexed the eastern part of the city in 1967.  At least 25 people were wounded and 150 required medical treatment for injuries or tear gas inhalation.  Police captured the gunman and hustled him away to save him from the angry Arabs.  Goodman had been studying at a Jewish seminary in Jerusalem for six years and apparently was an Israeli army reservist.  A lot of my friends and relatives have been killed, and I must take revenge, he told police after his capture.  The Jewish community and officials denied that the Jewish nation would condone or abet such an action which was obviously the act of a deranged man. The act set off demonstrations in the West Bank towns and a resumption of the general disorder that had afflicted the area for several weeks. Goodman went on trial on September 8th, after doctors testified that although he lived in a fantasy world, he was responsible for his actions.
GUATEMALA.  An executive of the Coca-Cola Company was assassinated.
AUSTRIA.  A man about 30 years old attacked the policeman guarding the office of the French military attache in Vienna.  The guard was knocked down and suffered serious injuries.  The search for the perpetrator has been unsuccessful.
FRANCE.  A car bomb exploded in heavy morning traffic, killing one person and injuring 63 others in an attack the French government implicitly blamed on Syria.  Three hours after the blast, two Syrian diplomats were ordered from France and the French ambassador to Damascus was recalled to Paris.  French Interior Minister Gaston Defferre declared the method of the bombing was indicative of the mentality of the perpetrators of this type of attack, who do not hesitate to spill blood on French territory to settle accounts in which France has no involvement.  The explosion was outside the office of the Lebanese-based weekly Al Watan Al-Arabi, which accused the Syrian secret services, and notably those in Paris, of having organized the attack.  It was not the first attempt on the life of the owner of the publication.
NETHERLANDS.  A powerful bomb was discovered and disarmed in time at the Kuwaiti consulate in the Hague.
GREECE.  The car owned by a U.S. secretary (Walenka Stanislas), responsible for issuing visas, was firebombed in her private garage at her Athens apartment.  The Revolutionary People's Struggle took responsibility for the attack.
UNITED STATES.  A bomb exploded at 2 am outside the offices of Lufthansa airlines in the center of Manhattan.  There were no injuries but there was considerable damage.  The Jewish Defense League claimed responsibility for the attack.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  A bomb attack was carried out against the German-American Institute in Tuebingen.  In a letter to a local newspaper, Revolutionary Cells claimed responsibility for the attack, stating that it was in protest against President Reagan's forthcoming visit to the Federal Republic.  There were no injuries but substantial damage to the building was incurred.
IRAN.  A car laden with explosives blew up outside the Syrian embassy in Tehran,  destroying the four-story building and injuring 16 passers-by.  None of the embassy employees were in the building at the time.  The Syrian ambassador to Iran blamed the attack on Iraq and elements of imperialism and Israel.  Attacks on foreign missions have escalated in Tehran, especially those whose governments maintain friendly relations with the Islamic government of Iranian leader Ayatollah Khomeini.
PORTUGAL.  The Rev. Juan Maria Fernandez Krohn was charged with attempted murder against Pope John Paul and ordered held for trial. The accused, a Spanish Roman Catholic priest who lives in France, rushed at the Pope with a bayonet as the Pope was climbing an altar of a church in Lisbon.  Investigating police stated that the attack probably had a religious motivation, perhaps related to the fact that the attacker had had his ecclesiastical education at a seminary founded by Msgr. Marcel Lefebvre, who was suspended by Pope Paul for supporting traditional Roman Catholicism in opposition to the changes of the Second Vatican Council.  Father Fernandez lived in the suburbs of France and administered to a small group of followers of Msgr. Levebvre. Witnesses reported that the man shouted Down with the Pope and down with Vatican .  At his trial in October, Krohn stated that he acted because the pontiff betrayed the church and encouraged communism through compromise with Soviet-Bloc countries.  He said he got the idea when he saw the assassination of Egyptian President Anwar Sadat on television.
ISRAEL.  Two firebombs were thrown at a military vehicle on the eastern outskirts of Jerusalem, damaging the vehicle but causing no injuries.  The attack came a day after the Israeli Cabinet reportedly decided to avoid a confrontation with Palestinian guerrillas along the Lebanese border.
ANGOLA.  The Red Cross International Committee reported that one of its Swiss nurses, Marie-Jose Burnier, was kidnapped by armed individuals during an attack on a Red Cross convoy in the Katchungo region.  In September, the pro-West, UNITA forces released the nurse.  The Red Cross later suspended most activities in Angola's central plateau because of the danger.
FRANCE.  A gunman fired three bullets through the plate-glass door of a branch of the Bank of America in the Place Vendome in Paris.  No one was injured.  The leftist group Direct Action claimed responsibility.
UNITED STATES.  Three members of an Armenian terrorist group, the Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia, were arrested and accused of placing an explosive device in front of the Air Canada cargo building at Los Angeles International Airport.  The bomb was defused by members of the Los Angeles Police Department's bomb squad. The arrests, made later in the day, were the culmination of four months of joint investigation by the FBI, Los Angeles Police Department and the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Office of a series of local bombings dating back to 1980.  The three accused are Hratch Kozibioukian, his wife Stanouche Kozibioukian, and Varant Barkev Chirinian.  Police believe this latest bombing may have been retaliation for the arrest of Armenians in Canada two weeks ago.  A fourth member, Vicken Tcharkhutian, was discovered in France.  The U.S. request for his extradition was refused by a French court on grounds that the 1909 Franco-American extradition treaty does not cover bomb fabrication.  France did expel the Armenian, however, who left for Cyprus, and thence to Libya.Tcharkhutian was arrested at Los Angeles International Airport in October, 1987.  In November he admitted in federal court to his involvement in a series of bombings in the U.S.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  Bombs exploded in four separate U.S. military facilities causing more than 180,000 dollars in damage but no injuries. The facilities were at Bamberg, Hanau, Gelnhausen, and Frankfurt.   The explosions came just a day before President Reagan arrived in Europe on his first visit since taking office. Tens of thousands of Europeans opposed to the deployment of new U.S. missiles in Europe were expected to rally in capitals the President will visit.  The Revolutionary Cells, believed to be an offshoot of the Red Army Faction, or Baader-Meinhof Gang, claimed responsibility for the attacks, stating the bombings were just a prelude.
GREECE.  In Athens, the Revolutionary People's Struggle (ELA) took responsibility for burning three cars belonging to foreign diplomatic missions.  One belonged to John Bung, an American serving with the Iraklion base in Crete. An ELA statement said that the multinational Honeywell-Bull Company has merged with ITT.  It is believed that ELA was under the impression that all the cars belonged to American military personnel.
UNITED KINGDOM.  Israeli Ambassador to Britain Shlomo Argov was shot and critically wounded in the head while leaving a banquet in London by an assailant wielding a submachine gun and aided by accomplices. The Palestine Liberation Organization denied having anything to do with the attack but Israel warned of retaliation.  Five weeks later, Israeli planes bombarded Lebanese PLO targets and Israeli troops moved in and was taken into custody.  Three Arabs--two Jordanians and one Iraqi-- were later arrested and charged.  The three belong to a dissident Arab terrorist group named Black June that now operates out of Syria and is openly hostile to PLO leader Yasser Arafat.  The shooting of Argov was a critical event in the sequence leading to Israel's invasion of Lebanon. On June 10, a dissident Palestinian group called al-Asifa, which split from the PLO in the early 1970s, claimed responsibility for the assassination attempt.  Argov regained consciousness on July 14.
PORTUGAL.  Erkut Akbay, an administrative official at the Turkish Embassy in Lisbon, was assassinated as a result of an armed attack.  His wife, Nadid Akbay, a secretary at the embassy, was seriously injured.  After eight months in a coma, she died in January 1983.  A man lay in wait for them at the door of their home, shot both with a 9mm revolver, which he left at the scene, and fled.  A clandestine Armenian terror organization assumed responsibility for the attack.  No one has been apprehended.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  Nine firms in Essen, Hochum, Duesseldorf, and Muenster which are partly U.S.-owned, received letters containing incendiary devices.  All letters were opened safely.  The letters were mailed from Hagen/Westfalen.  In the padded envelopes were an alarm clock, a flat battery and a cigarillo packet filled with a plasticine-like substance, which initial examination showed to be inflammable but not explosive.  A message read In the next war no one will be innocent.  Stop the madness.  We wish mister president and his friends a hot reception.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  Nine firms in Essen, Hochum, Dusseldorf, and Muenster which are partly U.S.-owned, received letters containing incendiary devices.  All letters were opened safely.  The letters were mailed from Hagen/Westfalen.  In the padded envelopes were an alarm clock, a flat battery and a cigarillo packet filled with a plasticine-like substance, which initial examination showed to be inflammable but not explosive.  A message read In the next war no one will be innocent.  Stop the madness.  We wish mister president and his friends a hot reception.
SWAZILAND.  A representative of the ANC was killed by a bomb explosion in the town of Manzini.  Petros Nyawose, who was the ANC deputy chief representative, and his wife Jabu were both killed when a bomb exploded in their car.  Several people were injured.  The murders follow several attacks on South African political exiles in Swaziland. South African agents are suspected.Note: Number of injuries is approximate.
CORSICA.  Three bombing attacks were committed against the homes of two Moroccan residents of the island and against a car belonging to another Moroccan.  There have been numerous attacks against Moroccans in recent months.
TURKEY.  Two men and two women set fire to the Pan American Airlines office in Ankara in protest against Israel's invasion of Lebanon. There were no casualties, although there was extensive damage.  The perpetrators drove away unhampered.
INDIA.  General Mobutu, head of state of Zaire, escaped an attempt on his life as he landed in Bombay on his way home from a recent trip to China. An armed Palestinian (as reported) was caught attempting to enter the presidential plane, and held by security forces.  The attack was believed to be due to Arab discontent with Zaire's diplomatic relationship with Israel.
COSTA RICA.  A bomb destroyed the main office of Honduran Air Services in the downtown section of San Jose.  The explosion also affected nearby establishments.  No group claimed credit for the attack, but the government of Costa Rica accused three Nicaraguan diplomats of taking part in the bombings, and demanded that they leave Costa Rica. On July 10, a dozen members of the right wing Nicaraguan Democratic Movement were jailed in San Jose when authorities linked them to the blasts and confiscated a pile of documents in their headquarters. On July 29, the Costa Rican government expelled three Nicaraguan diplomats after accusing them of complicity in the airline office bombing. Two Costa Rican diplomats were expelled from Managua and recognition of a Costa Rican consul was withdrawn in retaliation.
GREECE.  The Revolutionary Popular Struggle assumed responsibility for a bomb placed at the Gladstone Street (Athens) entrance to the Atlantic Travel Agency of a Jewish person.  The bomb was discovered by a cleaner and was disarmed by a military expert.
UNITED STATES.  A ticking gasoline bomb was removed from the doorway of Yugoslav Airlines near St. Patrick's Cathedral in New York. The bomb was described as awesome in its potential and authorities stated that if it had exploded, the devastation in life and property would have been tragic.  The bomb was later disassembled at the police detonating range.  Croatian nationalists are believed responsible.
LEBANON.  Unidentified gunmen kidnapped David Dodge, the acting president of the American University of Beirut, as he was walking home from his office.  Witnesses reported that at least two men armed with pistols threatened the educator, struck him when he resisted, forced him into a red automobile, and sped away.  Dodge had lived in Beirut for three decades. Lebanese officials stated that Dodge is almost certainly held by Iranian Embassy officials hoping to exchange him for an Iranian envoy who may have been kidnapped earlier in the month. (Iranian Charge d'Affaires Mohsen Mousavi: 7/04/82).  But on August 3, Lebanese security sources stated that Dodge was being held by a splinter group of the pro-Iranian militia Shiite Moslem Amal, seeking the freedom of an Iranian diplomat and aides kidnapped by Christian militiamen in East Beirut.  He was still unconscious from the blow he received on the head when he was abducted.Dodge was freed by his abductors in July of 1983 in good physical and mental condition.  No details were made available.
FRANCE.  A bomb exploded near a crowded cafe in the Place Saint-Sevrin (Latin Quarter of Paris), injuring 16 people.  An Armenian nationalist group (Orly) took responsibility in a phone call to the French news agency, asserting that the bomb was in protest for the French government's failure to keep a promise to grant political asylum to four members of the Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia, arrested in the takeover of the Turkish consulate in Paris on September 24, 1981.
FRANCE.  A bomb exploded at the Pub Saint Germain in Paris, injuring two people slightly.  No group claimed responsibility for the attack; but an Armenian terrorist group has claimed responsibility for several recent explosions, vowing to continue attacking French targets until France releases four of its members from jail.
PERU.  Terrorists threw dynamite bombs at the office of Quimica Suiza in Lima.  Minor damage was incurred.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  A bomb hidden in a suitcase of an Israeli passenger exploded at a passenger check-in station in Munich Airport for El Al flights.  Seven people were injured by the blast, two of them policemen, another a security officer for the airlines.  Four hundred people were in the area but no one was directly beside the suitcase.
AUSTRIA.  A firebomb was thrown into a private bank's display window in Vienna, causing material damage but no injuries.  The incendiary device opened a seven and one-half inch hole in a glass panel outside the bank.  The owners of the bank are Jewish but authorities refused to speculate on whether the attack was linked to other previous incidents against Jewish property.
AFGHANISTAN.  Rebels attacked the Soviet Embassy in the Afghan capital of Kabul wounding two government soldiers protecting the embassy and capturing two others.  The embassy attack followed several attacks in Kabul against the Soviet forces occupying Afghanistan since December 1979.  A diplomatic source speculated that some of the incidents are being sparked by a conscription drive launched in July by the Soviet supported Babrak Karmal regime to press recruits into the Afghan Army.
FRANCE.  A powerful bomb heavily damaged a bank patronized by Jewish residents in the east of Paris; a bank official theorized that the blast was connected with the Israeli invasion of Lebanon.  The bomb left a wrought-iron security rail on a window shattered, together with shattered windows and facades throughout the neighborhood.  The bank was once owned by the prominent Jewish Rothschilds family.
FRANCE.  Police managed to defuse an explosive device that was set to go off near a telephone center located in the 17th section of Paris. An unidentified person claiming to represent the Orly Group took credit for the blast in a telephone call; he apparently was unaware that the bomb had been defused.  The group appears to protest the arrest of Viken Charkhoudian, an Armenian from Iraq, who had been arrested in Los Angeles two months ago as an accomplice in an attempt to bomb Air Canada facilities.
FRANCE.  A little-known anarchist Bakunin-Gdansk Group claimed responsibility for an attack on the South African citrus fruit company.
GUATEMALA.  Unidentified assailants tossed explosives at the Israeli embassy and the country's only synagogue in Guatemala City in apparent protest of the Jewish state's support for the Guatemalan military government and a condemnation of Israeli forces who invaded Lebanon on June 6. At the embassy police opened fire at the bombers' getaway car but it escaped. The  bomb blast at the embassy shattered windows but no one was injured.  The bomb thrown at the synagogue failed to explode.
FRANCE.  An unidentified gunman riding in a speeding car fired at police guarding a Turkish travel agency in Paris.  No injuries were reported, but police said the 22mm rifle shot missed the guards and smashed a hole in a nearby window.  The travel agency is part of a complex of buildings housing offices of Middle Eastern governments.  The upsurge of international terrorism in France has led to calls for restriction of France's traditionally liberal policies on political asylum .
PORTUGAL.  A hitherto unknown Zionist Action Group claimed bomb attacks on Air France and West German Lufthansa airline offices which left heavy damage but no casualties.  The group, in a call to the Portuguese ANOP news agency, said the attacks were in protest against French and West German government policy towards Israel.
MOZAMBIQUE.  Ruth First, leader in exile of the ANC, was killed by a letter bomb at the Center for African Studies in Maputo, where she was working.  Three other people were slightly wounded.  South African agents are suspected.
INDIA.  A lone hijacker, identified as Museebad Singh, armed with a pistol and a hand grenade, hijacked a Boeing 737 on a scheduled flight from Bombay to New Delhi carrying 69 persons.  The hijacker demanded that political power in India's northwestern state of Punjab be transferred immediately to the Sikh-dominated Akali Dal party and that Sikh extremists jailed during recent disturbances be released.  When the hijacker appeared at the open door of the plane after it landed at the Sikh holy city of Amritsar, security forces hid under the aircraft and opened fire, killing him.  None of the 63 passengers and six crew members was injured.
UNITED STATES.  Pan American World Airways planes are being subjected to random searches, and security has been increased since a cleaning woman discovered a bomb on a Pan Am jet on its arrival in Rio de Janeiro from Miami.  The book-size device was removed.  No threat was received. Pan Am and Delta Airlines started spot checks on their planes.
UNITED STATES.  An explosion ripped the Venezuelan consulate offices in downtown Miami.  No injuries were reported at the nearly vacant building, although an office wall was badly damaged.  Omega 7, a group of militant Cuban exiles, claimed responsibility.  A caller to radio WINZ said the bomb was in retaliation for the Venezuelan government's treatment of Orlando Bosch, an anti-Castro militant who has been jailed in Venezuela for six years.
SWITZERLAND.  Terrorists calling themselves anti-Communist revolutionaries seized the Polish Embassy in Bern and held 13 diplomatic hostages.  The group's leader, who identified himself as Colonel Wysocki of the Polish Revolutionary Home Army, threatened to bomb and completely destroy the embassy and everyone in it unless martial law was abolished in Poland, all political prisoners were released, all prison camps in Poland were shut down, and repression against the Polish people was halted.  He told police that they had 55 pounds of explosives in the embassy and gave the Warsaw government 48 hours to comply with their demands.  After the siege had gone on for 24 hours, the gunmen freed three persons including a pregnant woman. Five more hostages were released the following day at which time the terrorists also delayed the deadline until Friday the 10th.  A ninth hostage escaped.On Thursday the 9th, Swiss police stormed the embassy after laying out barbed wire around the rear of the building.  Tear gas was used, apparently hidden in a box of food passed into the building.  When it exploded, the police rushed the building.  Eventually the five hostages were released and the terrorists were captured and arrested.  The gunmen had demanded a car and safe passage out of the country, which had been refused by the Swiss government.  Earlier, a diplomat who had hidden in the attic was rescued through a top-floor window after police scaled the building.In November, Switzerland rejected a request from Poland for the extradition of the four men, stating that they themselves intended to try the men in 1983 in their highest court.  The four men are Florian Kruszyk, 42, Krystof Wasilewski, 33, Miroslaw Plewinski, 23, and Marck Michalski, 20.
ITALY.  It is not known if the Red Brigades or related far-left groups were behind the minor explosion in Rome which damaged the offices of SIMA, an international airlines agency which books cargo shipments for several airlines.  The attack may have been related to Arab terrorist organizations which are known to be targeting Rome for future attacks.
FRANCE.  Terrorists booby-trapped a car with Israeli diplomatic license plates, seriously injuring an official of the Israeli arms procurement mission in Paris.  Three other people were also seriously injured, and more than 44 others were injured from flying glass, including school children attending a school nearby.  Diplomat Amos Man-El, Zoltan Mandel-Schmidt, and his wife, Veronica, were badly injured.  There have been over 20 terrorist attacks in Paris against Israel, Palestine Liberation Organization, Iraqi, Iranian, Syrian, Lebanese, and American targets in the last month.  The Armed Factions of the Lebanese Revolution took responsibility for the bombing.
HONDURAS.  Approximately 10 guerrillas of the Cinchonero National Liberation Movement, which is closely linked to leftist rebels in neighboring El Salvador, stormed the Chamber of Commerce building, taking 105 people hostage.  Twenty were released and three escaped.  The hostages included two Cabinet ministers and about 80 of the country's top business leaders.  Although their hostages include members of the richest families in the country, all the terrorists' known demands are political rather than monetary.  The guerrillas demanded the release of about 60 Salvadoran, Honduran, and other Latin American leftist activists believed to be in jail or to have disappeared after being detained by government forces during the last two years, as well as the removal of U.S. military advisers based here.  In addition, they asked that Honduras be withdrawn from the newly formed anticommunist Central American Democratic Community and that an antiterrorist law be repealed.  The spark for the takeover appears to have been the reported arrest on August 22 of Salvadoran guerrilla commander Alejandro Montenegro.Officials stated that they were offering nothing but safe conduct in exchange for the safe release of the hostages.  On September 23, the guerrillas released 20 more hostages.  Finally on September 28, the hostages were all released and the guerrillas were flown to Havana.
MOZAMBIQUE.  Five Christian missionaries were kidnapped by antigovernment rebels in Mavumba.  The five comprised an Italian missionary, three Italian nuns, and a Brazilian nun.
COLOMBIA.  A dynamite attack against the Israeli Embassy in Bogota caused an explosion in the front part of the residence where Ambassador Hayin Aharon had his office.  There were no casualties; the ambassador was out of town.  A vehicle sped past the embassy at the time of the explosion machinegunning the building. M-19, the Colombian 19 April Movement, claimed credit for the bombing and for the two people who were injured, one of whom was the ambassador's wife.  An anonymous spokesman for M-19 stated that the bombing was an act of solidarity with the Palestinians killed in Beirut.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY. A man was killed and a woman seriously injured by a dawn bombing in front of the offices of the Jordanian airline, Alia, in Frankfurt.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  A firebomb exploded near a radar antenna at the U.S. Army headquarters near Heidelberg, West Germany.  Firemen extinguished the blaze and disarmed a second and larger device before any damage was caused.  Flight operations were not disrupted and there were no injuries.  No group claimed responsibility.
LEBANON.  An Israeli Army bus transporting soldiers back to Israel on leave was ambushed in the town of Alayh (close to Beirut).  The attack, carried out with rocket-propelled grenades (RPGs) and machine guns, left six Israelis dead and 11 wounded.  It is believed that the operations are being carried out by terrorist teams penetrating Israeli occupied areas from Syrian-controlled Al-Bika valley.  A spokesman for the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) stated that his organization is going to confront any Israeli move on the Al-Bika valley.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  A high-powered explosive device was discovered concealed in a fire extinguisher in the basement of a 25-story U.S. military apartment building.  The device was defused before it could explode.   A similar device totally destroyed a U.S. Army intelligence center in Geissen in 1981.
BOLIVIA.  An Israeli club was bombed in Cochabamba City.  No injuries were reported.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  Unidentified vandals scrawled Death to American Imperialism and U.S. Pigs on 23 American-owned cars and slashed their tires outside two military apartment buildings in Karlsbad.  The attack prompted a tightening of security in the housing areas.
AFGHANISTAN.  Rebels fired rockets into the Soviet Embassy in Kabul, the Afghan capital, in the first major attack against the compound since the Soviet Union intervened militarily in Afghanistan in December 1979. Two missiles exploded inside the embassy compound, but there was no report of injuries or damage sustained.  The rebels claimed they damaged the eastern wall and broke windows. (see August 4, 1982)
ITALY.  Terrorists hurled Molotov cocktails at a building housing a small synagogue and Jewish community center in Rome.  No injuries were reported.  An obscure group called the Communist Metropolitan Front claimed responsibility; a band of 8 to 10 youths were seen hurling the Molotov cocktails at the building.
LEBANON.  A booby-trapped car exploded close to U.S. Marine positions on a Beirut beach in what police described as a direct attack on the American peacekeeping troops in Lebanon.  Two Lebanese civilians were seriously wounded and a Marine was grazed by debris that showered the beach after the explosion.
ANGOLA.  Angolan rebels of the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) captured two Brazilian technicians during a rebel attack on a town 150 miles south of Luanda.  Angolan authorities received a communique the following week from the rebels declaring the kidnapping in the name of UNITA.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  About 3,000 residents, most of them Americans, were evacuated from a 26-story apartment building in Eschborn while experts destroyed a time fuse set to trigger a 12-pound bomb in the building's basement garage.  Residents alerted the U.S. military police after they discovered wires protruding from a fire extinguisher packed in a plastic bag near the cars parked next to the building's main gas pipes.  The bomb was homemade.  No one claimed responsibility, but German militants were suspected.
SOUTH KOREA.  A homemade explosive was tossed onto the roof of the American Cultural Center in Kwangju in an unsuccessful attack on the U.S. facility.  No damage was reported.  Two guards rushed to the roof when they heard the explosion and extinguished the flames.  The bomb was made of a beer bottle and a newspaper fuse.
COLOMBIA.  A synagogue in the city of Medellin was attacked by twelve armed militants who harrassed the worshippers and burned Torah scrolls, U.S. and Israeli flags.  The militants, three of whom were women, wore masks over their faces with the letters PLO inscribed on them.  The attackers pushed the worshippers against the wall and spilled red ink on them.  The attack lasted about 20 minutes.
GUATEMALA.  The 33-year old physician daughter of Honduran President Roberto Suazo Cordova, was kidnapped by leftist guerrillas as she was leaving the hospital in Guatemala City where she worked.  The kidnappers demanded the publication of a political manifesto in Mexican and Central American newspapers.  Dr.  Xiomara Suazo Estrada was a Guatemalan citizen and has lived in that country for 20 years.  The kidnappers warned that her life would be in danger unless the Guatemalan government published the manifesto by 8:30pm on December 17.  The guerrillas did not identify themselves for tactical reasons.  Armed military patrols searched buildings and vehicles in the capital's streets but security officials said they found no clues to the whereabouts of the kidnapped doctor.  The Guatemalan government stood by its policy of not negotiating with terrorists, and the deadline for the publication of the group's manifesto passed.  In a final communique from the kidnappers the deadline was extended.  Finally, on December 22, fourteen Guatemalan, Mexican and Central American newspapers printed the guerrilla manifesto.  The message from the kidnappers identified them as members of the Pedro Dias Command of the Ixim (Mayan word for food) People's Revolutionary Movement.  They included the I.D. card of Dr.  Suazo.  On December 23, at sundown, after their only demand had been granted, the guerrillas released the woman, unharmed.  The published communique condemned U.S. imperialism in Central America.Dr. Suazo told reporters that she had been treated well and kept alone in a small room.  She had been injected with a drug when she was first seized.  Her captors remained masked throughout the nine-day ordeal and provided her with Communist literature to read.
UNITED STATES.  A powerful bomb damaged a suburban IBM office building during the evening, just four hours after a bomb caused extensive damage to a South African transport office on Long Island.  An anonymous caller told an editor of a White Plains newspaper that both actions were related, but declined to give an indication of what, if any, group instigated the bombings.  A call before the IBM bombing warned that a huge bomb would go off in 30 minutes, saying We did South African Airways. The call was repeated in five minutes and the bomb exploded at 7:40pm.  Damage to the building was extensive, but all personnel had been evacuated in time. IBM, which has extensive operations in South Africa, has been a leading target of groups critical of U.S. investments in South Africa.The earlier Long Island blast took place at the South African Railways Procurement Office.  Police said the bomb went off only minutes after the four-story building was evacuated and after a bomb squad threw a blast blanket over the device to contain the explosion.
LEBANON.  Italian soldiers of the multinational peacekeeping force found two time bombs made from anti-tank mines in two U.N. schools for Palestinian refugees.  The fuse on one of the bombs had gone off but failed to detonate the explosive charge.  It was set to go off just before school started.  The sound of the fuse drew attention to the device, and guards from a nearby Italian guardpost were summoned.  The second bomb of similar construction was found in a stairwell of a nearby U.N. school after a search.
LEBANON.  Minas Bedros Simonian, an Armenian youth, was killed in an assassination attempt attributed to agents of Turkey, according to the London branch of the Armenian Popular Movement for the Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia (ASALA).  The statement also reported that another member was gravely wounded in the attack but managed to escape.  While no details were given in the statement, the killing of Simonian raises the number of ASALA commandos or sympathizers allegedly killed by Turks or agents of Turks to three.
AFGHANISTAN. 16 Soviet advisors were kidnapped during a bus ride through Mazar-i-Sharif, a provincial capital 35 miles south of the Soviet border. February 7 rescuers were able to free 12 of the Russians, the remaining four had been mutilated and killed.  Four were injured.  The Soviet rescuers killed the guerrillas who had kidnapped their advisors.  Two separate Afghan resistance groups claimed responsibility for the kidnapping.
UNITED STATES.  OMEGA 7 set three bombs in Miami.  The bombing of a cigar factory in Little Havana section caused minor damage; a travel agency involved in booking trips to Cuba suffered more extensive damage and a third bomb was defused.  The bombings occured late in the night.  They were claimed by the anti-Castro group in a call to a Spanish-language station.
CYPRUS.  A Lebanese merchant of Armenian descent was shot and seriously wounded while getting out of his car to enter his house in the Agios Nikolaos area of Limassol.  Taking part in the attempt against the merchant were four people of Arab descent; three were arrested and are being interrogated by police.
FRANCE.  A bomb blast at the Spanish consulate in Nice killed one woman. No responsibility claimed.
SPAIN.  A bomb blast at the French consulate in Barcelona wounded a policeman. No group immediately claimed responsibility for the explosion.
LEBANON.  A rocket grenade struck a troop truck of the French military contingent, wounding one French soldier.
BELGIUM.  New Armenian Resistance bombed Turkish airline offices in Brussels.
SPAIN.  An anti-tank grenade was fired at the American Embassy from a homemade cardboard bazooka but fell short of its target and blew up a car parked in front of the building.  There were no injuries and the only damage to the embassy was cracked glass above the main door.  The attack is being attributed to ETA.
NETHERLANDS.  An attack against the French Consulate in Amsterdam seriously damaged the building but resulted in no casualties.  The action was claimed by someone in the name of the Dutch Militant Autonomous Front.  It was supposedly meant as a protest against French participation in European defense and the arms race.  There was skepticism about the claim, however, and some witnesses thought a car which screeched away from the building moments before the explosion bore French license plates.
LEBANON.  Gunmen attacked an Israeli patrol at the southern approach of Sidon, firing rockets and killing three Israeli soldiers.
UNITED STATES.  A bomb shattered glass doors in the offices of Aeroflot Soviet Airlines and shook a nearby hotel.  No injuries resulted.  The Soviet Embassy building is less than a block away.  Jewish Defense League claimed responsibility.
PAKISTAN.  Several French targets were the victims of bomb explosions. A bomb hit the home of the French general consul in Karachi.  An explosion hit the Air France booking office in a Holiday Inn.  Another explosion hit the Air France Cargo office and another hit the Alliance Francaise cultural center in Karachi.  An Iraqi dissident group, the Iraqi Mujahidin later claimed responsibility for these attacks on French targets in Pakistan and said that it would continue to hit French interests all over the world as long as France supported Iraq in its war against Iran.
BELGIUM.  A bomb was defused outside the Indian embassy in Brussels.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  A bomb blast destroyed the Dusseldorf offices of Standard Electric, an American owned firm.  The bomb was planted outside the offices.
PERU.  Outside Ayacucho Department, Sendero Luminoso bombed the Peruvian-North American Cultural Center in Arequipa.
IRAQ.  The state news agency in Kuwait quoted Minister of State Abdul Aziz Hussein as saying that a bomb found in the offices of Kuwaiti Airways Corp. in Baghdad had been defused.  Mr. Hussein gave no further details.
LEBANON.  The PLO has accused the Mossad of being responsible for the abortive assassination attempt on the life of the PLO office director in Beirut, Tawfiq as-Safadi, when his car came under a hail of bullets as he was returning home.  As-Safadi was struck once in the head by a bullet.
LEBANON.  In an attack claimed by Islamic Holy War someone pitched a grenade from the window of a building south of Beirut.  Five members of a Marine patrol deployed near the airport were wounded.
SPAIN.  Madrid.  A small bomb exploded harmlessly outside the Libyan diplomatic mission.  The bomb was left just under the closed circuit security camera about 20 meters from the entrance to the building.
UGANDA.  Suspected National Resistance Army of Uganda members have shot to death a Canadian engineer at his home.  It was the first attack on a foreign worker resident in Uganda since guerrillas issued a final warning earlier this month advising foreigners to leave the country or face serious reprisals.
ARGENTINA.  Two bombs were found in British schools in Buenos Aires and deactivated before they could go off.  The bombs were found at the Saint John School and at Saint Patrick's School.  Last week an anonymous caller representing the 2 April Group, the Captain Giacchino Commnand warned British schools to stop their activities in Argentina before the end of March. The group said its aims are to recover the Malvinas Islands by any means and claim to have been responsible for the letter bombs sent to Margaret Thatcher and a U.S. Navy building in London last week.
CYPRUS.  A bomb found inside a bag in the yard of a Libyan cultural center in Nicosia was defused before causing damage.
NICARAGUA.  A team of assassins killed a ranking Salvadoran guerrilla commander in her home.  Nelida Anaya Montes, known as Commander Ana Maria, of the Salvadoran rebels' Marxist Popular Liberation Forces, was one of five top Salvadoran rebel commanders.
GREECE.  A rented car, packed with explosives, detonated near the Saudi Arabian Embassy as an Embassy vehicle carrying Saudi Arabia's First Secretary passed by it.  The explosion was very powerful, causing serious damage to the Saudi official vehicle and wounding the First Secretary, his driver and two others.  People's Revolutionary Solidarity Organization (PRSO) claimed credit for the explosion.  Since a group using a similar name, People's Revolutionary Struggle, has claimed previous bombings in recent months against the U.S. Embassy, this group sent a xeroxed copy of the booby-trapped car's rental agreement.  The group accused Saudi Arabia of being agents of North American imperialism, supporting the criminals of the Turkish military state and financing the Zionists of the Israeli Army.
LEBANON.  A powerful bomb shattered the U.S. Embassy in Beirut, killing at least 57 people (17 of them Americans) and wounding at least 100.  A car filled with 200-500 pounds of dynamite rammed the front of the embassy, resulting in the blast, killing the driver as well.  The Islamic Jihad Organization (Islamic Holy War), a pro-Iranian group, immediately claimed responsibility; however, two other groups also claimed responsibility for the blast. There are indications, but no proof, that Jihad is linked with the Islamic Amal force, breakaway members of the Amal militia, a Shiite Moslem force in Lebanon.  The Islamic Amal force is based in and around Baalbek, a Lebanese town under Syrian control 45 miles east of Beirut where several hundred Iranian Revolutionary Guards have taken up residence.  Last month, a large wall inscription in central Baalbek, near posters of Khomeini, proclaimed, Death to the Americans, death to Israel, death to the Russians.
GRENADA.  The 10-year old daughter of the Venezuelan charge d'affairs was wounded in the leg by a rifle shot while she and her family were walking up the steps to their suburban home.  An investigation was underway.
GREECE.  A hitherto unknown organization calling itself the Group for Martyred 'Isam as-Sartawi (the PLO leader assassinated in Portugal last month) claimed responsibility for two overnight bomb attacks in a northern suburb of Athens.  Police said one of the bombs exploded under a car belonging to the Syrian Embassy - destroying it completely - and the other near a school attended by children of Lebanese diplomats.  There were no casualties.  A phone caller said that the bombs were a response to oppressive elements in Syria and Lebanon.  A group called The Army for Iran's National Liberation also claimed responsibility for the bomb saying they placed the bombs to punish Khomeyni's allies.
EL SALVADOR.  Lt. Commander Albert Schaufelberger was the first American U.S. military advisor to die in El Salvador.  He was killed  by a two-man assassination team as he sat in his car in a parking lot across from the Central American University.  He was waiting to pick up a friend who works as a receptionist at the University.  According to witnesses, Schaufelberger was talking on or listening to his vehicle radio when a blue van pulled up next to the car.  Two young men, approximately 25 years of age, descended from the van and walked unhurriedly toward the U.S. officer's car.  Reaching it, one of the two thrust a pistol through the car vent wing window and shot Schaufelberger in the head and chest.  Not long after the incident, Radio Venceremos (the official transmitter of the guerrilla's Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front [FMLN]) broadcast the following message:  One of our units in the metropolitan command, the Clara Elizabeth Ramirez commando, assassinated on 25 May the second in command of the North American military advisors.  We advise the other North American advisors that El Salvador will become a Yankee tomb.  Another broadcast subsequent to the shooting indicated the operation was carried out by members of the Popular Liberation Forces (FPL), one of the several groups comprising the FMLN.
PERU.  Sendero Luminoso launched an incursion into the nation's capital of Lima.  At 6:20pm, during the middle of the evening rush hour, the entire city was blacked out for one hour by coordinated bombings which knocked down ten high tension pylons.  In the ensuring darkness and confusion, SL units positioned in Lima proceeded to detonate some 40 bombs, targeting, among other things, offices near the U.S. Embassy, the Sheraton Hotel and the Bayer Chemical Corporation's main industrial plant.  The Bayer factory complex (which is a West German firm) that produces acrylic fiber is reported to be the single largest industrial operation in Peru.  An estimated $300 million in damages resulted from fires which largely gutted the plant following the explosion of several incendiary devices within the complex.  It is significant to note that in a similar attack last year, when SL cut high tension electrical lines before proceeding with a wave of bombings against government and corporate installations within Lima, the offices of Bayer and other chemical companies were targets.
LEBANON.  Palestine Liberation Organization guerrillas ambushed two Israeli military vehicles in the Shouf Mountains of Lebanon, killing two soldiers and wounding three others.  A group called the Lebanese National Resistance Front claimed responsibility for the ambush 10 miles southeast of Beirut. The front is a shadowy group believed to be made up of Lebanese leftist parties who have fought alongside PLO guerrillas.
SPAIN.  In Oyarzun, a newly rebuilt Michelin warehouse used to distribute corporation products throughout northern Spain was attacked for the second time in six months.  The earlier attack (in February of 1983) caused damages exceeding $1,000,000 and total destruction of the building.  The June bombing caused similar damage and also destroyed the newly reconstructed facility. A left-wing organization called the Autonomous Anti-Capitalist Commandos claimed responsibility.
ARGENTINA.  A bomb of medium power exploded in front of the building which houses the U.S. Marines in charge of guarding the U.S. Embassy offices in Buenos Aires, but there were no casualties.  The explosives were placed in the right rear side of a mini bus parked in front of the building.  The vehicle was completely destroyed and the windowpanes of this and many other nearby buildings were broken.
LEBANON.  Gunmen failed in an assassination attempt against a top military aide to PLO chairman Yasser Arafat and a PLO official blamed mutinous guerrillas who have challenged Arafat's leadership.  The aide, Col. Ezzedin Sherif, known as Abu Iyad, was wounded in the legs and one arm at a Palestinian camp just outside of Damascus.  His son was also wounded in the incident.
GREECE.  Two Lebanese teenagers hijacked a Libyan Boeing 707 over the Mediterranean and later surrendered, freeing their 32 hostages unharmed but leaving a time bomb ticking in their luggage.  Airport security found the bomb rigged inside a Polaroid-type camera when they searched the hijackers' luggage hours after their surrender at the Larnaca airport.  Bomb experts successfully dismantled the bomb minutes before it would have exploded. The Libyan Arab Airways jet was hijacked shortly after the takeoff from Athens and the ordeal continued for some 20 hours.  The two hijackers, who had demanded to be flown to Tehran, were identified as Radja Aref Akmed, 19, and Hasan Mahti Saadoun Hajj, 17.  One of the hijackers was brandishing a pistol in the air.  The hijackers are believed to be Lebanese Shiite Moslems searching for their missing religious leader, Imam Musa Sadr who disappeared in Libya in August 1978.  Followers of Sadr have carried out seven hijackings since his disappearance.  The two claim to be members of the Black Berets.
CHAD.  The leader of the rebels in northern Chad said that he was holding an American, Mark Frohardt, 32 years old, of Colorado Springs, Colo., and said he was a spy for the CIA.  The French humanitarian organization Doctors without Borders said Mr. Frohardt was the technical coordinator for its medical teams in Chad.He was released on August 2, 1983 after government forces captured the town he was being held in.
COSTA RICA.  A bomb exploded in the parking lot in front of the Interior Ministry Building.  The car containing the bomb had Nicaraguan plates and one of the terrorists killed in the blast was Rodrigo Cuadra, an active member of the Democratic Revolutionary Alliance (ARDE) an anti-Sandinista group.  The other seriously wounded individual is Francisco Morales Leal, also a member of ARDE.  A Costa Rican was also injured by the blast which shattered windows in the buildings nearby.
COLOMBIA.  Bombing operations in Bucaramanga targeted the Colombian-North American Bilingual Institute among other businesses.
JAPAN.  Radicals hurled Molotov cocktails and planted homemade fire bombs at three U.S. military bases in an apparent protest against next month's port call of the USS New Jersey.  No injuries or damage was reported and no one immediately claimed responsibility.  At 9 p.m. two youths on a motorbike sped past the U.S.  Naval Base at Yokosuka and hurled two Molotov cocktails at the gate.  At approximately the same time, a fire on the Yokota U.S.  Air Force Base grounds was linked to the burned remains of a knapsack containing an incendiary bomb with a timing device.  Another small firebomb was discovered at the U.S.  Army camp at Zama.  All three bases are about 30 miles from Tokyo.(see 11/1/1983)
FRANCE.  Armenians attacked the British Council (official UK cultural agency) protesting against London terrorist trial.
FRANCE.  A 29-year old Syrian national of Armenian extraction confessed to planting the bomb at Orly Airport that killed seven people and wounded 56. Varadjian Garbidjian also claimed to be the head of the French branch of the Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia (ASALA). Mr. Garbidjian said that he gave a suitcase containing the bomb to a passenger on a flight scheduled to take off for Istanbul.  He told the passenger he had too much luggage and paid him about $65 to check the bag for him.  The bomb was supposed to have gone off once the plane had taken off.  Instead, it exploded as the suitcase made its way up a baggage ramp.
VENEZUELA.  A Venezuelan rancher was kidnapped by the Colombian terrorist group ELN.  He was released September 21.
COLOMBIA.  M-19 terrorists abducted an advisor to President Betancur, Italian national Paolo Lugari.  Retained by the Colombian Government to advise it on the reconstruction of Popayan (destroyed in 1983 by an earthquake), Lugari was kidnapped from his residence by four M-19 members dressed as personnel of the government's State Security Service.  He was held until July 27 when he was released with a personal message from M-19 for the Colombian president.  Lugari maintains that during his captivity, the M-19 questioned him at length about the reconstruction project.  The M-19 cell that took him identified itself as the Julio Pena squad of the William de Jesus Parra group.
ETHIOPIA.  Ten Swiss citizens working for an aid organization were kidnapped by guerrillas. Four women and six men were seized near Jari where the aid group Terre des Hommes (Land of Man) operates a village for orphans. The only demand by the Tigre People's Liberation Front was to have someone from the organization pick up the 10 captives.  He said the motive apparently was publicity for the liberation movement.
UNITED STATES.  The Treasurer of the Ahmaddiya Movement in Islam (AMI) had two molotov cocktails thrown through the front of his residence in Detroit, Michigan.  The incendiary devices failed to explode.  Jewish Defense League claimed credit, but authorities attributed the attack to Fuqua, which is a rival Islamic sect.
LEBANON.  A bomb left at the Air France office in Beirut malfunctioned Thursday, producing a small explosion that caused no damage or injuries. The bomb's detonator went off but failed to explode the 3.3-pound TNT charge in a small attache case at the main entrance of the airline's west Beirut office.  There was no immediate claim of responsibility.
SOVIET UNION.  A man in his early 30s roared past Soviet guards outside the British Embassy in Moscow and drove a car containing a homemade bomb into the diplomatic compound.  The Russian guards followed him into the embassy courtyard and dragged the man out.  The explosive device was removed without incident.
UNITED KINGDOM.  An American Express office in London was damaged when a device believed to be a firebomb exploded.  No one was hurt and no group claimed to have planted the bomb.  Windows were blown out in the building.  Manager of the branch said that some sort of incendiary device may have been pushed through the letter box.  It is speculated that the target of the explosion could have been Bank El-Saud of Saudi Arabia located in an annex to American Express.
UNITED STATES.  The Philippine Embassy in Washington D.C. was shaken by molotov cocktails over the weekend.  Damage was very minor and no one was hurt.
UNITED KINGDOM.   A bomb went off at Israel's Leumi Bank located near Oxford Circus. No one was injured and no one claimed responsibility.
UNITED STATES.  A bomb exploded at the Venezuelan consulate in Miami and a telephone caller said that an anti-Castro group, Omega 7, claimed responsibility.  No one was injured when the bomb exploded in the doorway of the office on the 14th floor of the building.  The attack was claimed as retaliation for the treatment of imprisoned terrorist Orlando Bosch in Venezuela.
IRAN.  Firebombs were thrown into two French Embassy cars in Tehran by ASALA.  Two embassy staff members were slightly injured by the first firebomb.
SOUTH KOREA.  A bomb ripped through the U.S. cultural center in the city of Taegu, 150 miles southeast of Seoul, killing one person and injuring five others.
FRANCE.  Marseilles.  One man was killed and 26 people were injured when a bomb destroyed the American, Soviet and Algerian pavilions at an international trade fair in Marseilles.  An Armenian guerrilla group that calls itself Orly claimed credit for the destruction of property in France. The Charles Martel group and Lebanese Armed Revolutionary Factions (LARF) claimed credit for the blast as well.
LEBANON.  A grenade was thrown at the U.S. embassy.  One marine was wounded.
HONDURAS.  A medium-sized bomb exploded in an empty lot in front of the U.S. Embassy in Tegucigalpa.  The police anti-bomb squad had picked up some fragments of the bomb and were investigating its composition. There were no injuries or material losses.
LEBANON.  A few minutes after the explosion took place at the U.S. compound, the building housing the French peacekeeping troops was hit in the same manner.  An estimated 500 kilos of explosive material similar to TNT were used in the blast.
FRANCE.  The Committee for Liquidation of Computers (CLODO) claimed responsibility for an incendiary attack against the Sperry-Univac Company in Toulouse.  The message left by the group indicated that the attack was made in protest to the U.S. invasion in Grenada and considered Sperry-Univac to be multinational and in complicity.
PERU.  Sendero Luminoso attacked the Sheraton Hotel in Lima where the Interamerican Press Association was scheduled to open a conference.
MARTINIQUE.  An attack has taken place in the center of Fort-de-France, Martinique, against a building housing the offices of the Chase Manhattan Bank and the American Consulate.  There were no casualties and damage is slight.  Threats to U.S. interests in Martinique followed the U.S. military invasion of Grenada.
LEBANON.  A dawn suicide car bomb attack destroyed an Israeli military intelligence headquarters in Tyre, killing 39.  Shiites were responsible.
FRANCE.  Facility attack against Iranian business.  
JORDAN.  A parcel containing explosives planted near the offices of the Saudi Arabian Airlines was defused by police.
GREECE. The left-wing extremist group 17 November Revolutionary Organization (R17N) claimed responsibility for the murder of U.S. Navy Captain George Tsantes and his Greek driver.  The men were killed as they waited for a green light in their car by two men on a motor scooter.  It was reported that the gun, a .45-caliber magnum, appears to be the same gun used in the assassination of CIA station chief Richard Welch on Christmas Day, 1975.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  The Honeywell computer factory was bombed.
SPAIN. Seven bombs exploded in companies affiliated with the U.S. Targets were National Cash Register Company offices in Vitoria and San Sebastian, Coca Cola offices in Pamplona and San Sebstian, a Texaco office in Victoria, and IBM offices in Bilbao.  Also bombed were the offices of the Hispanic-American Cultural Association in Bilbao.  Damages were reported as significant to NCR offices in Vitoria and the IBM offices in Bilbao.
SPAIN. Seven bombs exploded in companies affiliated with the U.S.  Targets were National Cash Register Company offices in Vitoria and San Sebastian, Coca Cola offices in Pamplona and San Sebstian, a Texaco office in Victoria, and IBM offices in Bilbao.  Also bombed were the offices of the Hispanic-American Cultural Association in Bilbao.  Damages were reported as significant to NCR offices in Vitoria and the IBM offices in Bilbao.
ISRAEL.  A bomb demolished a Jerusalem bus, killing six people and injuring 43 others, some of them critically.  Responsibility for the attack was claimed both by Yasser Arafat's wing of the PLO and by anti-Arafat PLO rebels.
KUWAIT.  The terrorist group Islamic Holy War claimed responsibility for a remote-controlled bomb attack on an electrical power station.
LEBANON.  In a second explosion in downtown Beirut at a hotel patronized by foreigners, four people were killed and a dozen injured.  Minutes before that blast, a truck packed with explosives blew up outside a French army barracks, killing a French paratrooper and 14 Lebanese civilians.  Nearly 30 people were injured.  The driver of the truck jumped out and escaped before the explosion.  A group called the Black Hand claimed responsibility for both explosions in a telephone call within an hour of the blasts.  Past terrorist attacks on foreign installations in Lebanon have been attributed to Shia Muslims supported by the revolutionary government of Iran.
LIBYA.  Police link an arson attack against a French high school in Tripoli to Islamic extremists because of threats against French and U.S. foreign policy in the Middle East.  No one was injured.
SPAIN.  An employee of the Jordanian Embassy was shot to death and another seriously wounded by an assailant who fired a submachine gun into their car at a Madrid street corner.  Police said the attacker, who appeared to be an Arab in his mid-20s, escaped after the attack. No group immediately claimed responsibility.
PERU.  Sendero Luminoso has been attacking the mining industry in the Andes. The Cobriza copper mine in Ayacucho, an operation run jointly by North American companies and a state-run Peruvian consortium was the latest facility to come under attack.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  A homemade bomb exploded near the entrance to the South African Embassy in Bonn.  The bomb was a device with a pipe-like construction which was being examined by experts.  There was no damage.
LEBANON.  Islamic Jihad kidnapped the consul of the Saudi Arabian Embassy, Hussein Farrash.  He was abducted on his way to work by a six-member terrorist team using two vehicles that neutralized his chauffeur and bodyguard.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  A firebomb was thrown through the window of the commissary at the U.S. McGraw Army Barracks in Munich.  The Revolutionary Cells are suspected, although no one claimed credit.  The building sustained substantial damage due to fire.
SUDAN.  A Chevron Oil Company complex was overrun by guerrillas.  Three foreign workers were killed and seven others, including an American, were wounded. About 20 attackers penetrated the lightly-guarded facility and stormed houses, occupied by workers, firing automatic weapons.  A note left at the scene said, We have warned you, and now we are striking.  The mostly Christian guerrillas want independence for southern Sudan from the Moslem-dominated government.
FRANCE.  The former Iranian Chief of Staff of the late Shah of Iran's regime, Gholam Ali Oveissi, was shot down on a fashionable street in Paris.  The Butcher of Iran was shot in the back of the head and died instantly.  Also executed was his brother, a former army colonel.  Oveissi was considered responsible for the September 8, 1978 massacre  when troops fired into an anti-Shah crowd killing and wounding several demonstrators.  He also was a leader of pro-Royalist Iranian exiles trying to overthrow the current government of Ayatollah Khomeini.  The Islamic Jihad claimed credit for the attack and indicated they will seek out and destroy enemies of Ayatollah Khomeini wherever they are located. In Washington, a group called the Revolutionary Iranian Organization for Liberation and Reform claimed responsibility.
LEBANON.  Two gunmen forced Frank Regier, an American professor of electrical engineering, into a car near the university.  No one claimed responsibility, but there is speculation that the Islamic Jihad is involved. He was released unharmed April 15, 1984.
ITALY.  Leamon Hunt, retired U.S. diplomat who had been serving as the ranking civilian of the multinational force monitoring the Sinai Accord, was assassinated in Rome.  Although Hunt arrived at the gate of his residence in a chauffeur-driven armored car, a few men jumped out of a blue Fiat car and poured automatic weapon fire into the reinforced rear window until they were able to penetrate the window and strike Hunt in the head.  The Fighting Communist Party (linked to the Red Brigades) claimed credit, denouncing the Sinai Pact and demanding that the U.S. get out of Lebanon, Italy get out of NATO and that there be no U.S. nuclear missiles deployed in Sicily.  LARF (Lebanese Armed Revolutionary Faction) also claimed credit from Lebanon.  The description of the individual who fired the AK-47 rifle which killed hunt fits that of an Arab or Middle Eastern type.  This may have been a joint operation mounted with remnants of the Red Brigades that are in desperate need of outside support to revive guerrilla operations in Italy.
LIBYA.  Jordan has claimed that demonstrators set fire to its embassy in Tripoli, and that Libyan police watched without trying to stop the mob. Jordan has accused Libyan authorities of transporting between 200 to 250 Chadian mercenaries and workers, Libyan police and security men and Qaddafi's female bodyguards to the Jordanian Embassy to burn it down.  They say that 100 Libyan security men at the embassy participated in ransacking it and threatened to kill Ambassador Sami Shamayleh and his staff, who had locked themselves in one of the rooms.
ISRAEL.  Two hand grenades exploded outside a clothing store on a busy commercial street in Jerusalem injuring 21 people.  The Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP) claimed responsibility.
LEBANON.  Jeremy Levin, the newly arrived bureau chief for Cable News Network, disappeared in Beirut and was believed kidnapped. There is speculation that the Islamic Jihad is involved.  Levin escaped and gained his freedom on  February 14, 1985.  The journalist spent most of his confinement in isolation and could provide no hard evidence regarding the fate of the four remaining Americans in the hands of the Islamic Jihad.
UNITED KINGDOM.  A bomb exploded in a nightclub catering to Arabs injuring 23 people, minutes after a device blew up at an Arab newsstand.  Police warned that the blasts may have been set by Libyan hit squads hunting expatriates.  No one was injured in the newsstand incident.Two bombs destroyed a car and injured a couple and their child in an attack that came less than twenty four hours after the bomb in the nightclub.As of 3/14/84 one Libyan businessman was being held on conspiracy charges in the bombing blitz and 22 other Libyans were being detained. The government of Libya has denied any involvement, however.
FRANCE.  A small bomb exploded outside the Armenian Youth of France Center, injuring two persons passing by.  No group claimed responsibility.
PERU.  At least six bombs exploded during the evening just after the government declared a state of emergency on the eve of a general strike protesting the economic policies of President Belaunde.  Two of the explosions took place by the U.S. Embassy and the Sheraton Hotel.
UNITED STATES.  A hijacking of a Piedmont flight was carried out by a man claiming to be Lieutenant Spartacus of the Black Liberation Army. He had placed explosives aboard the aircraft.  The flight ended in Cuba where passengers were led into the airport shopping area.
GREECE.  A gunman killed a British cultural attache and his companion, a British employee, in Athens. A group calling itself the Revolutionary Organization of Socialist Moslems claimed responsibility, saying that Whitty's killing was in response to British attempts to resume former colonial rule in the world by spreading colonialist culture under a new guise.  Whitty, who ran the British Council--a government agency that promotes British interests abroad--was slain by a lone gunman who fled on foot.
NICARAGUA.  As of March 31, a total of 11 ships had been damaged or sunk as a result of mine laying operations by the Nicaraguan Democratic Force (FDN) and the Democratic Revolutionary Alliance (ARDE).  Vessels affected included those of Soviet, Panamanian, Dutch, Liberian and Nicaraguan registry. Mining in Corinto, Bluefields and El Bluff apparently was carried out by ARDE and in Puerto Sandino by the FDN (reportedly backed by the CIA).
NICARAGUA.  As of March 31, a total of 11 ships had been damaged or sunk as a result of mine laying operations by the Nicaraguan Democratic Force (FDN) and the Democratic Revolutionary Alliance (ARDE).  Vessels affected included those of Soviet, Panamanian, Dutch, Liberian and Nicaraguan registry. Mining in Corinto, Bluefields and El Bluff apparently was carried out by ARDE and in Puerto Sandino by the FDN (reportedly backed by the CIA).
NICARAGUA.  As of March 31, a total of 11 ships had been damaged or sunk as a result of mine laying operations by the Nicaraguan Democratic Force (FDN) and the Democratic Revolutionary Alliance (ARDE).  Vessels affected included those of Soviet, Panamanian, Dutch, Liberian and Nicaraguan registry. Mining in Corinto, Bluefields and El Bluff apparently was carried out by ARDE and in Puerto Sandino by the FDN (reportedly backed by the CIA).
UNITED KINGDOM.  Libyan-backed terrorists set off bombs in Manchester targeting residences of alleged opponents of the Qadhafi regime.  The attacks came soon after the Libyan Embassy in London  came under the control of a People's Bureau set up by a pro-Qadhafi student committee in London.
SOUTH AFRICA.  The armed wing of the African National Congress (ANC) set off a bomb at the Transkei Consulate in Bloemfontein.  Transkei is a black tribal homeland which is cooperating with Pretoria to curtail ANC infiltration into South Africa.
SPAIN.  An 8-kilo explosive device, placed under a radiator, was detonated by a wrist watch timer in a restaurant catering to U.S. servicemen.  18 Spaniards were killed, and among the 82 wounded, 15 of them were Americans. The three story building located near Madrid collapsed.  Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility for the attack. A Palestinian group called Wa'd, meaning promise, also claimed responsibility for the attack.  According to a Spanish weekly, Cambio 16, Spanish police reportedly identified two Palestinians who were involved in the bombing of the restaurant.  They had entered Spain carrying false passports a few days before the explosion and rented an apartment in the vicinity of Madrid.  Another Palestinian, carrying a forged Moroccan passport, was arrested in Frankfurt Airport on 2/19/85 with 10 kg of explosive charges.  He told his investigators that he had been told to transfer the explosives to Madrid where they would be used in order to attack American interests.
UNITED KINGDOM.  In the most blatant act of Libyan state-sponsored terrorism ever recorded in Europe, a Qadhafi-ordered hit man, who had recently been assigned to the Libyan Embassy in London, fired a submachine gun into a crowd of demonstrators who had gathered outside the mission building in St. James Square.  Several anti-Qadhafi protestors were wounded and a British policewoman was killed.  A crisis followed in which the British laid siege to the Libyan Embassy in London while the Libyans retaliated by taking similar action against the British Embassy in Tripoli.  Both governments finally broke diplomatic relations and withdrew their respective representatives following brief negotiations.  Upon entering the abandoned embassy in London, following the departure of the Libyan representatives, British authorities uncovered traces of the arms cache which had been kept at the installation.
FRANCE.  A man claiming to belong to a Japanese anarchist group telephoned a Paris news agency that he had carried out two bombings on Japanese targets to support demands for the release of an anarchist condemned to death in Japan.  One person was wounded in an explosion at Sony's French headquarters and another was wounded at another Japanese firm, Sonauto.
FRANCE.  A Spanish Basque member of ETA who was in exile in France was killed by members of the self-styled Anti-Terrorist Liberation Group (GAL). Another member of ETA was also wounded when the two men were driving in the village of St. Martin-d'Arrosa when two individuals on a motorcycle opened fire on their car.
FRANCE.  Three bombs exploded in a Paris suburb where a monument was recently erected to Armenians killed by Turks during World War I.  The blasts left 13 people injured. A group calling itself the Anti-Armenian Organization took responsibility for the bombing.  The first exploded at the monument itself, the second at a cafe in the Armenian section of town, and the third at a school near the monument.
BRAZIL.  Forty-eight hours after its inauguration, the office of Amnesty International in Sao Paulo was broken into and fire set to files, documents, and information literature.  The police had no clues to the vandalism.
SRI LANKA.  An American couple was kidnapped by the People's Liberation Army, an obscure splinter group of the Eelam Tigers, an underground organization fighting for a separate Tamil nation in northern Sri Lanka.  They threatened to kill the couple unless the Government paid a ransom of $20 million and freed 20 imprisoned rebels.  Even though the demands were not met, the couple was released on May 15.
SOUTH AFRICA.  A high-powered device ripped through the office complex of a gold mine run by the Anglo American Corporation, 150 miles southwest of Johannesburg.  The ANC were responsible, and damage to the facility was extensive.
COLOMBIA.  Nine bombs aimed at U.S. and Honduran targets exploded in Bogota and Cali, killing two people and injuring 11.  Two bombs exploded near the U.S. Embassy, and a car bomb heard five miles away exploded 200 feet from the U.S. ambassador's residence.  The Revolutionary Armed Forces claimed responsibility for the bombings in a telephone call.  All the casualties occurred in one incident, when a bomb exploded in the downtown offices of the Honduran airline SAHSA.  The two dead and three of the injured were among a group of young people that brought the bomb into the office.
NICARAGUA.  Nicaraguan rebel leader Eden Pastora was wounded when a bomb exploded during a news conference he was holding just inside of Nicaraguan territory near the border with Costa Rica.  Five people were killed, including a U.S. newswoman.  A total of 27 people were injured.  No group claimed responsibility but there was speculation that members of the Basque group ETA were involved.According to the London Times, 8/13/93, the bomber was Vital Roberto Gaguine who was a member of a secret unit of Sandinista intelligence.
NORTHERN IRELAND.  Police in the Irish Republic foiled a plan to launch a mortar bomb attack across the border on a British Army base in Northern Ireland.  Shortly before midnight, police intercepted a truck containing mortar bombs and a firing device on a road near the border with Northern Ireland's County Armagh.  He said officers believe they foiled a terrorist plan to drive across the border and attack the British Army base at Middletown.
CANADA.  Two saber-wielding Sikhs burst into the Indian consulate in Vancouver and ransacked offices.  The men, brandishing two foot long curved ceremonial swords, smashed a glass door, several pictures and some furniture before they were arrested.  The men were upset over the use of troops against Sikh militants in the Indian state of Punjab.  They gave up without a struggle.
SPAIN.  Several individuals of ETA set fire to a French truck at Oyarzun in the Basque province of Guipuzcoa.
ISRAEL.  On June 21-22 four guerrillas slipped off a merchant ship chartered by PLO members loyal to Arafat, and attempted to launch an attack in Israel.  The attack failed and the terrorists apparently went back to Tripoli.   Israeli gunboats seized a Lebanese ship that was involved in the  Palestine Liberation Organization attempt to land terrorists in Israel for a mass murder attack.  The military command said Israeli gunboats stopped a 750-ton merchant ship off the Lebanese port of Tripoli.  The military command said the boat, a merchant ship flying a Lebanese flag, was chartered by a group of PLO members loyal to Yasser Arafat, chairman of the guerrilla group.
LEBANON.  The Austrian consul in Beirut was assassinated.  The incident was not claimed.
ARGENTINA.  The fuel tanks of two tankers, presumably the Perito Moreno and the Belgrano, (belonging to Shell Oil Company) exploded in Buenos Aires, setting off a large fire in the area.  The Sargento Cisneros Commando claimed credit for blowing up the vessels because the enterprise (Shell) collaborated with the British during the Malvinas war.  Approximately ten crew members were missing.  Officials are denying that sabotage was involved.
UNITED KINGDOM.  A former Nigerian Cabinet minister who is a leading opponent of his country's six-month-old military government was kidnapped in London. The official, Umaru Dikko, was later found drugged but alive in a crate labeled diplomatic baggage in an airport cargo terminal.  Two other men, one of them dead, were found in similar crates at Stansted Airport.  Dikko was freed at the airport by the British antiterrorist police minutes before the Nigerian Airways plane was about to leave for Lagos.  Dikko was considered a most wanted man in Nigeria and apparently was being sent back to stand trial.  Seventeen people, including a Nigerian diplomat, have been arrested in connection with the kidnapping.
EGYPT.  Mines placed in the Suez Canal have struck 19 ships since July 9 but in most cases the damage has been minor.  A Soviet vessel was reportedly the first ship damaged by the mines.   Two other Soviet ships were damaged in later incidents.  During the weekend of July 28, three ships including two freighters and an oil rig belonging to Amoco (whose parent company is Standard Oil of Indiana), were damaged.  On August 5th the Liberian-registered tanker, Olympic Energy, was severely damaged by an explosion.  There were reports that the vessel was sinking, but no casualties had yet been reported. On August 15 the engine room of a Cypriot cargo ship was severely damaged by a mine.  On September 20 a Saudi passenger ship on its way to pick up Moslem pilgrims in Saudi Arabia was rocked by an explosion.  The ship was carrying no passengers at the time and there was no major damage to the vessel.  This was the first explosion involving shipping in the area since August 15.  Some of the other nationalities of ships reportedly damaged were Greek, Turkish, East German, Polish, Danish, Chinese, and Japanese. On July 31 the Islamic Jihad released a communique claiming that it had laid 190 accoustic mines in the Gulf of Suez and the southern entrance to the Red Sea to punish imperialists for encouraging an expansion of the Iran-Iraq war.  It is believed doubtful that this terrorist group could conduct such an operation without direct support of a sympathetic nation, and is considered a cover for Libyan-state sponsored terrorism.
ANGOLA.  The National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) claimed responsibility for a bomb blast at a Gulf Oil Company pipeline that killed ten people.  The attack occurred in the city of Chimbolo in oil-rich northern Cabinda Province.  The attack took place at night and in addition to damage to the pipeline a house where a family was sleeping was destroyed.  UNITA claims the casualties were much higher.
COLOMBIA.  The pro-Castro Army of National Liberation (ELN) bombed the Chilean Consulate in Medellin.
EGYPT.  Mines placed in the Suez Canal have struck 19 ships since July 9 but in most cases the damage has been minor.  A Soviet vessel was reportedly the first ship damaged by the mines.   Two other Soviet ships were damaged in later incidents.  During the weekend of July 28, three ships including two freighters and an oil rig belonging to Amoco (whose parent company is Standard Oil of Indiana), were damaged.  On August 5th the Liberian-registered tanker, Olympic Energy, was severely damaged by an explosion.  There were reports that the vessel was sinking, but no casualties had yet been reported. On August 15 the engine room of a Cypriot cargo ship was severely damaged by a mine.  On September 20 a Saudi passenger ship on its way to pick up Moslem pilgrims in Saudi Arabia was rocked by an explosion.  The ship was carrying no passengers at the time and there was no major damage to the vessel.  This was the first explosion involving shipping in the area since August 15.  Some of the other nationalities of ships reportedly damaged were Greek, Turkish, East German, Polish, Danish, Chinese, and Japanese. On July 31 the Islamic Jihad released a communique claiming that it had laid 190 accoustic mines in the Gulf of Suez and the southern entrance to the Red Sea to punish imperialists for encouraging an expansion of the Iran-Iraq war.  It is believed doubtful that this terrorist group could conduct such an operation without direct support of a sympathetic nation, and is considered a cover for Libyan-state sponsored terrorism.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  The Guardsmen of Islam claimed responsibility for hijacking an Air France 737 jet to Tehran.  The group demanded the release of five Iranians being held in France for an assassination attempt on former Iranian Prime Minister Shapur Bakhtiar in Paris in 1980.  The hijackers managed to smuggle a small quantity of plastic explosives onto the aircraft in Frankfurt with which they threatened to blow it up unless the pilot shifted course towards the Middle East.  In Tehran automatic weapons, ammunition and grenades were brought on board for the hijackers for withstanding any rescue attempt to recover the aircraft.  Negotiations between the French and Iranian governments prevented a major tragedy. The terrorists released the hostages on August 1, limiting themselves to blowing up the cockpit of the aircraft as a protest for their demands not being met.  Apparently there was at least some local backing from official sources in Iran in carrying out this incident.
EGYPT.  Mines placed in the Suez Canal have struck 19 ships since July 9 but in most cases the damage has been minor.  A Soviet vessel was reportedly the first ship damaged by the mines.   Two other Soviet ships were damaged in later incidents.  During the weekend of July 28, three ships including two freighters and an oil rig belonging to Amoco (whose parent company is Standard Oil of Indiana), were damaged.  On August 5th the Liberian-registered tanker, Olympic Energy, was severely damaged by an explosion.  There were reports that the vessel was sinking, but no casualties had yet been reported. On August 15 the engine room of a Cypriot cargo ship was severely damaged by a mine.  On September 20 a Saudi passenger ship on its way to pick up Moslem pilgrims in Saudi Arabia was rocked by an explosion.  The ship was carrying no passengers at the time and there was no major damage to the vessel.  This was the first explosion involving shipping in the area since August 15.  Some of the other nationalities of ships reportedly damaged were Greek, Turkish, East German, Polish, Danish, Chinese, and Japanese. On July 31 the Islamic Jihad released a communique claiming that it had laid 190 accoustic mines in the Gulf of Suez and the southern entrance to the Red Sea to punish imperialists for encouraging an expansion of the Iran-Iraq war.  It is believed doubtful that this terrorist group could conduct such an operation without direct support of a sympathetic nation, and is considered a cover for Libyan-state sponsored terrorism.Note: Date is approximate.
EGYPT.  Mines placed in the Suez Canal have struck 19 ships since July 9 but in most cases the damage has been minor.  A Soviet vessel was reportedly the first ship damaged by the mines.   Two other Soviet ships were damaged in later incidents.  During the weekend of July 28, three ships including two freighters and an oil rig belonging to Amoco (whose parent company is Standard Oil of Indiana), were damaged.  On August 5th the Liberian-registered tanker, Olympic Energy, was severely damaged by an explosion.  There were reports that the vessel was sinking, but no casualties had yet been reported. On August 15 the engine room of a Cypriot cargo ship was severely damaged by a mine.  On September 20 a Saudi passenger ship on its way to pick up Moslem pilgrims in Saudi Arabia was rocked by an explosion.  The ship was carrying no passengers at the time and there was no major damage to the vessel.  This was the first explosion involving shipping in the area since August 15.  Some of the other nationalities of ships reportedly damaged were Greek, Turkish, East German, Polish, Danish, Chinese, and Japanese. On July 31 the Islamic Jihad released a communique claiming that it had laid 190 accoustic mines in the Gulf of Suez and the southern entrance to the Red Sea to punish imperialists for encouraging an expansion of the Iran-Iraq war.  It is believed doubtful that this terrorist group could conduct such an operation without direct support of a sympathetic nation, and is considered a cover for Libyan-state sponsored terrorism.Note: Date is approximate.
EGYPT.  Mines placed in the Suez Canal have struck 19 ships since July 9 but in most cases the damage has been minor.  A Soviet vessel was reportedly the first ship damaged by the mines.   Two other Soviet ships were damaged in later incidents.  During the weekend of July 28, three ships including two freighters and an oil rig belonging to Amoco (whose parent company is Standard Oil of Indiana), were damaged.  On August 5th the Liberian-registered tanker, Olympic Energy, was severely damaged by an explosion.  There were reports that the vessel was sinking, but no casualties had yet been reported. On August 15 the engine room of a Cypriot cargo ship was severely damaged by a mine.  On September 20 a Saudi passenger ship on its way to pick up Moslem pilgrims in Saudi Arabia was rocked by an explosion.  The ship was carrying no passengers at the time and there was no major damage to the vessel.  This was the first explosion involving shipping in the area since August 15.  Some of the other nationalities of ships reportedly damaged were Greek, Turkish, East German, Polish, Danish, Chinese, and Japanese. On July 31 the Islamic Jihad released a communique claiming that it had laid 190 accoustic mines in the Gulf of Suez and the southern entrance to the Red Sea to punish imperialists for encouraging an expansion of the Iran-Iraq war.  It is believed doubtful that this terrorist group could conduct such an operation without direct support of a sympathetic nation, and is considered a cover for Libyan-state sponsored terrorism.Note: Date is approximate.
JORDAN.  A bomb went off under a U.S. Embassy water truck in Amman, injuring two people in a passing taxi.  No one claimed responsibility.
CHILE.  A Coca-Cola distributor's office was bombed by the Manuel Rodriguez Patriotic Front in Valdivia.
SPAIN.  ETA activists hurled a gasoline bombs into three Renault showrooms in Barcelona and Madrid.
ISRAEL.  Israeli police defused a powerful time bomb minutes before it was set to explode in a car parked outside the headquarters of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's Herut Party in Jerusalem.  No one immediately claimed responsibility for the bomb, but Palestine Liberation Organization guerrillas were suspected because of slogans painted under the car's hood.
HONDURAS.    Two bombs were placed in the Tegucigalpa International Airport.  An anonymous phone call to the airport security personnel resulted in bomb disposal personnel locating and deactivating both devices.
INDIA.  Seven Sikh hijackers between the ages of 16 and 22, demanded an Indian Airlines jetliner on a domestic flight be flown to the United States. The hijackers were armed with bombs, pistols and daggers.  Negotiations between the Sikhs and Sheik Mohammed bin Rashid alMaktoum, the Defense Minister of the United Arab Emirates, were held in the airport control tower at Dubai.  Among the demands of the hijackers were the creation of a separate Sikh state, the release of 14 Sikhs imprisoned in Pakistan for two previous hijackings and the withdrawal of the Indian Army from the predominantly Sikh state of Punjab.  The incident ended peacefully shortly after the negotiations.
SPAIN.  ETA terrorists bombed a French Peugot auto dealership in Guecho. The explosion caused substantial damage.
LEBANON.  A remote-controlled bomb exploded near a passing Israeli patrol in southern Lebanon.  There were no reports of casualties but several military vehicles were destroyed.
MOZAMBIQUE.  Two Italian engineers were kidnapped by anti-government guerrillas.  The Italians had been working on the Corumana Dam, 150 kilometers from Maputo when guerrillas of the Mozambique National Resistance Front abducted them.  Authorities believe they will be released shortly unharmed.
SPAIN.  A Saudi Arabian engineer died from wounds suffered while he sat at a cafe in Marbella.  One of his two Saudi companions was also injured. The Islamic Jihad recently promised to carry out attacks against undisclosed Saudi targets in Europe.
EGYPT.  Mines placed in the Suez Canal have struck 19 ships since July 9 but in most cases the damage has been minor.  A Soviet vessel was reportedly the first ship damaged by the mines.   Two other Soviet ships were damaged in later incidents.  During the weekend of July 28, three ships including two freighters and an oil rig belonging to Amoco (whose parent company is Standard Oil of Indiana), were damaged.  On August 5th the Liberian-registered tanker, Olympic Energy, was severely damaged by an explosion.  There were reports that the vessel was sinking, but no casualties had yet been reported. On August 15 the engine room of a Cypriot cargo ship was severely damaged by a mine.  On September 20 a Saudi passenger ship on its way to pick up Moslem pilgrims in Saudi Arabia was rocked by an explosion.  The ship was carrying no passengers at the time and there was no major damage to the vessel.  This was the first explosion involving shipping in the area since August 15.  Some of the other nationalities of ships reportedly damaged were Greek, Turkish, East German, Polish, Danish, Chinese, and Japanese. On July 31 the Islamic Jihad released a communique claiming that it had laid 190 accoustic mines in the Gulf of Suez and the southern entrance to the Red Sea to punish imperialists for encouraging an expansion of the Iran-Iraq war.  It is believed doubtful that this terrorist group could conduct such an operation without direct support of a sympathetic nation, and is considered a cover for Libyan-state sponsored terrorism.
CYPRUS.  Police defused a bomb discovered in the garden of the Libyan Embassy cultural center in Nicosia.  The bomb consisted of two gas cylinders tied to a wad of explosives and a timer.  Pro and anti-Qadhafi elements have been engaged in attacks on each other on Cyprus for some time.
SPAIN.  A Kuwaiti government advisor was assassinated and officials believe an Iranian hit squad was responsible.
BELGIUM.  A bomb heavily damaged the offices of Litton Business Systems, a subsidiary of the U.S. firm, Litton Industries in Brussels.  No one was injured.  Responsibility for the blast was claimed by the Communist Combatant Cells who contacted a news agency shortly after the explosion.  The police have no previous record of such a group.  Litton is involved in military contracts and the development of weapons.
LEBANON.  Pro-Syrian PLO guerrillas ambushed a car in the city of Sidon, killing all the occupants, including an Israeli intelligence agent.
COLOMBIA.  A West German oil engineer, his driver and an interpreter have been kidnapped by a group of leftist guerrillas in the northeastern region of Arauca.  The police believe the National Liberation Army (ELN) to be responsible.  The ELN is the only major rebel group which has refused to sign a truce with the government.
PORTUGAL.  A bomb exploded outside a French bank in Lisbon.  FP-25 claimed credit as an expression of solidarity with ETA members protesting the French Government's decision to turn ETA members residing in France over to Spanish authorities.  Bombs were discovered and dismantled at two other French-owned facilities on the same date.
LEBANON.  Four Lebanese employees of the Associated Press news agency disappeared en route to work in Beirut.  American journalists in Lebanon have been specifically targeted for attack by a pro-Iranian terrorist group because the journalists are viewed as spies.  They were released 30 hours later.
MALTA.  A car belonging to the British High Commission in Malta has been damaged by a bomb explosion.  No one claimed responsibility.
SPAIN.  A gunman carrying a false Moroccan passport was arrested shortly after he shot and wounded a Lebanese citizen in a central Madrid shopping mall.  It was the fifth attack on Arabs in Spain this year.  An Arab man was arrested.
FRANCE.  A French citizen fired randomly into a cafe in Brittany frequented by Turkish workers, killing two of them and wounding three others.
COLOMBIA.  Guerrillas of the ELN attacked the oil exploration camp set up by the West German Mannesmann Company in eastern Colombia.  About 40 armed men harangued the workers and then set fire to buildings, bulldozers and a helicopter.
MALTA.  A bomb severely damaged the Italian Embassy in Malta.  The Embassy was empty at the time of the explosion.
SPAIN.  A French policeman was killed and two others wounded when members of ETA attacked a toll booth on the border.
LEBANON.  Gunmen kidnapped the Bulgarian commercial attache and took him in his green Lada jeep to one of their centers.
INDIA.  The British Deputy High Commissioner for Western India was shot to death by two unidentified assailants as he was being driven to work in downtown Bombay.  Two tall gunmen in track suits fired four pistol shots into the car as it slowed at a traffic circle.  Two bullets hit diplomat Perry Norris in the head and chest through the car window.  The Revolutionary Organization of Socialist Moslems claimed responsibility for the attack. The same group claimed responsibility for the assassination of British diplomat Kenneth Whitty in Athens, Greece in March of 1984.
BOLIVIA.  Bombs exploded at the German company Hansa.  MIR denied involvement.
PERU.  The Sendero Luminoso was responsible for bombing the Peruvian-American Cultural institute in Lima and another branch of the same institute in Piura.
GREECE.  An explosives expert was killed in Athens when he attempted to dismantle a car bomb under an Iraqi Embassy auto.  Three other bombs were discovered in the vicinity.  An Iraqi underground opposition movement calling itself Islamic Action in Iraq claimed responsibility for planting the four bombs.  The bombs were meant to kill Iraqi diplomats stationed in Athens who reportedly monitor the activities of Iraqi opposition figures in Europe.  All of the bombs involved were capable of being detonated by remote control.
PORTUGAL.  The Popular Forces of April 25 (FP-25) claimed credit for an early morning grenade attack against the Iberian headquarters of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.  The attack slightly damaged a parked car and broke windows but caused no injuries.
BELGIUM.  Six explosions damaged emergency fuel pipelines of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization around Belgium, setting off at least two fires but causing no injuries.  The explosions came a day before the start of a three day meeting of NATO foreign ministers in Brussels.  The Communist Combatant Cells claimed responsibility, saying that NATO had made war the principal focus of its actions.
ITALY.  A man traveling with a false Moroccan passport was killed with a silencer-equipped pistol in a street ambush in Rome.  He was identified as a Palestine Liberation Organization member.  The PLO's Rome office promptly accused Israel's secret services of the slaying which occurred in an ambush near the Via Veneto.
NEW CALEDONIA.  Two French tourists were kidnapped by an anti-independence group in the French south Pacific territory of New Caledonia.  The couple was released three days later, and reported that they had been held in the presence of unarmed men. Authorities reported that seven others had been detained for questioning.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  A bomb attack was carried out against the Turkish Consulate General in Muenster on Christmas morning. The force of the explosion tore the entrance door, secured with bullet-proof glass, off its hinges, but caused no further damage.  The explosive was a simple, so-called fuse bomb, detonated by a fuse wick, used in firecrackers.
JORDAN.  Policemen discovered a bomb near the residence of one of Arafat's closest advisors.  The bomb which reportedly was found in a bag and weighed about thirty pounds was defused a few minutes before it was set to detonate.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  A terrorist bomb damaged a French diplomatic building in Bonn, the eighth attack in two weeks on U.S., British, and French installations in West Germany.  Police reported no casualties in the attack on the building which houses the French Embassy's technical department.  The Red Army Faction is suspected.Several RAF bombs exploded across Germany this day.  Some were claimed.
LEBANON.  Army explosive experts deactivated a six-pound bomb planted at the entrance to the French-Lebanese bank in West Beirut's Ramlet al-Baida neighborhood.  ASALA claimed responsibility.
COLOMBIA.  Three people were injured and there was serious property damage as the result of a dynamite attack on the Meyer Institute, a U.S.-run language school which is located in downtown Bogota.  Authorities believe the attack to be tied to the recent extradition of drug traffickers to the U.S.
LEBANON.  A bomb was detonated in the car of Zaven Karagozian, a Dashnak Party (Armenian Revolutionary Federation) leader.  Karagozian lost a leg in the explosion and was reported in critical condition.  No one claimed credit for the attack.
GUADALOUPE.  A Ford auto dealership was one of the targets in a bombing spree related to the trial of two Revolutionary Caribbean Alliance (ARC) members in Pointe-A-Pitre.
LEBANON.  Two French military observers were killed in an ambush while they were touring the southern suburbs of Beirut.  The Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility, saying that the soldiers were caught blatantly spying for NATO, Israel, and the Lebanese Phalangists.
BOLIVIA.  A passenger who was carrying dynamite in a briefcase was killed when the explosive went off on board a Bolivian airliner enroute to Miami.  The Lloyd Boliviano Airlines Boeing 727 landed normally in the city of Santa Cruz after the explosion.  No one else was injured.  The passenger was identified as Armando Guerra Perez.  No details are known about his motive.
IRAQ.  Kurdish rebels kidnapped two Italian technicians as a protest of foreign support for the Iraqi government.
GREECE.  A bar catering to U.S. servicemen was the target of a crude bomb. Seventy eight people, most of them Americans,  were injured in the blast at Bobby's Bar. The National Front took credit for the attack, saying the act was not directed against any Greeks but against the Americans who are responsible for the continuing occupation of Cyprus.Additional info:  The embassy site identifies ELA along with Carlos as the perpetrators.
COLOMBIA.  Leftist guerrillas exploded bombs in front of four American businesses in the northern city of Medellin.  The bombs exploded at one hour intervals in front of the offices of Union Carbide, Xerox, IBM, and General Telephone and Electronics, causing minor property damage.  A private guard was killed at the IBM facility.  In a joint communique, the National Army of Liberation (ELN) and the Ricardo Franco Front faction of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) claimed responsibility.
LEBANON.  A group of Lebanese seized a Cyprus Airways jetliner and demanded the release of two Lebanese terrorists jailed in Cyprus.  The gunmen freed the plane and all hostages after the Nicosian government agreed to consider releasing the pair who had hijacked a Romanian jetliner in June 1983.  The Black Brigade claimed responsibility.
LEBANON.  An Israeli major, Shaul Zehavi, was killed by a roadside bomb that exploded near the Shiite village of Bazouriyeh.  In response to the attack, Israeli troops imposed a curfew on several Shiite villages in the area.
BOLIVIA.  A medium-power bomb exploded in front of the Bolivian-American Bank in La Paz.  The bomb had been placed under the steel shutters which cover the bank windows.
ITALY.  The killing of a Libyan emigre businessman in Rome appears to have had a political motive, according to authorities.  According to police, 13 Libyan emigres have been killed in Italy since 1980, supposedly by agents of Libyan leader Qaddafi.
LEBANON.  A massive car bomb exploded in front of the Beirut residence of a militant Shia Moslem leader believed to be behind terrorist attacks on U.S. installations.  The suspected terrorist leader escaped unharmed. More than 80 people were killed and 200 injured in the attack.  The U.S. has been accused of involvement, although CIA personnel had no contact with those who actually carried out the bombing. Apparently in late 1984 President Reagan approved a covert operation directing the CIA to train and support several counterterrorist units for strikes against suspected terrorists before they could attack U.S. facilities in the Middle East.  About four months later, members of one of those units, composed in part of Lebanese intelligence personnel, acted without CIA approval on an unauthorized mission.  They were reportedly responsible for the hiring of the perpetrators involved in this act. Administration officials quickly canceled the entire covert support operation when faced with even an indirect connection to the car bombing.
LEBANON.  A suicide car bomber killed 12 Israeli soldiers and wounded 14 others in a convoy in southern Lebanon.  A young woman's body was found among the remains.  The Lebanese National Resistance Front (connected with the Syrian National Resistance Party) claimed credit. Islamic Jihad also claimed credit.
PORTUGAL.  Seven bomb blasts rocked French, West German and British businesses and homes in Lisbon and the central city of Evora, causing extensive damage but no injuries.  Popular Forces of April 25 claimed credit.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  A 13-pound ticking bomb was discovered at an officer's club on an American army base in Stuttgart. No one claimed credit, probably due to the fact that the bomb was a failure.
CYPRUS.  A bomb destroyed the front door of ESSO Cyprus Inc., oil company, an affiliate of the EXXON Corporation.  No one claimed responsibility for the blast.
SAUDI ARABIA.  An Arab hijacked a Saudi Arabian jetliner over Riyadh but was shot to death by security agents after he exploded a grenade as the Boeing 727 sat on the runway of an eastern Saudi airport.  All 76 passengers and 21 crew members aboard the domestic flight were freed before the hijacker was killed.
INDIA.  Soviet diplomat Igor Gezha disappeared while jogging in a New Delhi park.  The police had no clues but were questioning both Afghan and Iranian refugees living in New Delhi.  Authorities were uncertain as to whether there was a link to the murder of another Soviet official in New Delhi a few days later.  (see 3/21/85)
INDIA.  Two gunmen riding a motorcycle assassinated a Soviet official as he sat in a limousine outside the Soviet Embassy in New Delhi. Valentine Khitrichenko, an engineer, was a staff member of the embassy's economic section.  The motorbike carrying the two assailants approached the Soviet envoy's car and a single shot was fired.  The car skidded to a halt and more shots were pumped into the vehicle. The Ukrainian Reactionary Force claimed responsibility for the assassination and said that the group's objective is the withdrawal of Soviet forces from their homeland. (see 3/17/85)
PERU.  Tupac Amaru guerrillas gutted three Kentucky Fried Chicken outlets in Lima in their latest assault against American targets in Peru.
GUATEMALA.  An apparent right wing death squad assassinated University of San Carlos professor Flavio Jose Quesada Zaldana, a Nicaraguan national, in Guatemala City. Zaldana was a member of the Faculty of Architecture at the university.
FRANCE.  The Anti-Terrorist Liberation Group (GAL), a violently anti-ETA organization, killed ETA leader Francisco Xavier Galdeano in the French border city of St. Jean de Lux late in March.  Galdeano was involved in laundering funds obtained by ETA through its revolutionary tax. He also served as a correspondent for the radical Basque newspaper EGIN.  He moved to France in 1982 to avoid Spanish police surveillance.
CHILE.  The Manuel Rodriguez Patriotic Front (FPMR) was responsible for car bombs which went off at IBM, the Bank of Boston, Citibank, and Republic National Bank of New York.
FRANCE.  An explosion at a theater in Paris during a festival of Jewish films wounded about 18 people, three of them seriously.  The bomb had been placed under a seat in the Rivoli Beaubourg Cinema and detonated shortly after 10 p.m.  It dug a hole in the floor, started a fire and rained debris on the approximately 50 patrons.  The theater had recently received a letter threatening to blow everything up.  Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility for the attack in retaliation for the Israeli Iron Fist policy in Lebanon. Some fear the attack could signal a new phase in racially-inspired terrorism.
GREECE.  A group calling itself Khristos Kasimis planted a bomb outside the West German Embassy in Athens early in April to demonstrate support for the hunger strike of RAF prisoners in West Germany.
GREECE.  Black September claimed credit for a rocket attack against a Jordanian airliner as it prepared to take off from an Athens Airport. The rocket failed to explode, leaving only a small hole in the fuselage.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  A bomb exploded at the Hamburg offices of a marine technology research firm, International Shipping Studies (ISS). The company was working on a feasibility study for the development of a new NATO frigate.  The Timmerman Fighting Unit, believed to be associated with Revolutionary Cells, claimed responsibility.  The explosion occurred as 100,000 demonstrators protested against deployment of NATO nuclear weapons in Heilbron, Frankfurt, Cologne, Dortmund, Hannover, West Berlin, Nuremberg and Munich.
PERU.  Sendero Luminoso guerrillas bombed the Chilean Embassy in Lima, reportedly as a diversionary action designed to focus police attention on the embassy area rather than the San Isidro region where the president of the Peruvian Elections Board was about to be assassinated.
ISRAEL.  An Israeli cab driver was shot to death in Jerusalem.
ISRAEL.  Fatah commanders were intercepted by Israeli naval units before they reached the Israeli coast.  The merchant ship carrying a terrorist team was sunk by a missile boat after it fired on Israeli craft.  The engagement took place about 100 miles off the coast and at least 20 Fatah guerrillas were drowned.  The terrorist team was apparently armed with a variety of equipment to allow them to carry out assassinations and bombings.
SWITZERLAND.  A bomb exploded in the offices of the Libyan Arab Airlines. Two Arabs were arrested.
ISRAEL.  A rocket-propelled grenade was fired from Jordanian territory at an Israeli patrol, injuring one person.
ISRAEL.  Palestinians threw a hand grenade at an Israeli intelligence center in Bat Yam, south of Tel Aviv.  One of the center's guards was wounded in the explosion.
SPAIN.  The American-owned Avis car rental offices in San Sebastian and Vitoria were bombed, as well as the local Ford dealership in Vitoria. The attack was part of a major international campaign by ETA against tourists planning to visit the Mediterranean resorts.  The group had recently announced that it would be striking at the economic interests of the oppressive Spanish states in tourist zones in retaliation against government plans to alter the economy of the Basque region to make it more dependent.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  While President Reagan was on an official visit to Germany, a bomb exploded 12 miles north of Cologne at the repair facilities of a French firm which supplies electronics equipment to the West German armed forces. Proletarian Action Commando claimed responsibility.
LEBANON.  An Israeli gunboat patrolling off southern Lebanon opened fire on a rubber dinghy heading toward Israel, killing five camouflaged terrorists. The dinghy was equipped with a 50-horsepower motor and was painted in camouflaged colors.  It bore Arabic markings similar to those found on another terrorist boat.
BOTSWANA.  A powerful bomb went off in Gaborone, killing a South African political refugee who had been living in the city for some time.  The man was a known member of the African National Congress. The body of the victim was mutilated beyond recognition and the car was completely destroyed.
PERU.  A bomb was tossed into the garden of the U.S. Ambassador's residence in Lima, causing light damage but no injuries. Tupac Amaru is suspected.
MOZAMBIQUE.  A Red Cross relief worker was killed and another person wounded in an attack on their truck by Mozambican rebels.
LEBANON.  French journalist Jean-Paul Kauffman was abducted immediately after arriving in Lebanon from Paris.Kauffman was released, along with Marcel Carton and Marcel Fontaine, on May 4, 1988, after more than three years in captivity.  As of mid-May, 1988, French officials would not say what concessions had been made, if any, to win their release.
LEBANON.  Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility for kidnapping the American director of the American University medical center.  Six gunmen fired a shot at the feet of a second doctor walking with David Jacobsen, who then quietly went with his abductors.  After seventeen months in captivity, Jacobsen was released by his captors on November 2, 1986.  While details of his release are still rather sketchy, the Reagan administration is being sharply criticized for its secret role in selling arms to Iran as part of negotiations for the hostages' release.
BELGIUM.  The Peace Conquerors claimed responsibility for the bombing of the Bayer Company, a West German pharmaceutical and chemical company in Brussels.  A letter claimed the bombing was conducted to protest the alleged dumping of chemical waste into the North Sea.
SWITZERLAND.  An explosion at a Geneva railway station has been claimed by a Palestinian group calling itself the Martyrs of Tell Al-Zaltar. Several hundred Palestinians died when the Tell Al-Zaltar camp in East Beirut was beseiged by Lebanese Christian Phalangists in the summer of 1976.  The caller said more explosives, which had not been primed, had been planted in toilets at Geneva's Cointrin Airport, a fact confirmed by police. Two Palestinians were arrested in connection with the bombings.
LEBANON.  Shi'ite Amal militiamen kidnapped the Austrian ambassador in Beirut.  He was released within 24 hours.
LEBANON.  Gunmen kidnapped another American in what may have been an attempt to abduct the President of the American Univerisity of Beirut.  The victim, Thomas Sutherland, a professor at the university, was returning from the U.S. and was to have been accompanied by the school president.  While Sutherland was being driven from the airport in the president's car, gunmen shot at the auto's tires, bringing it to a halt.  No group has claimed responsibility.
LEBANON.  Shiite extremists demanding expulsion of Palestinian guerrillas in Lebanon hijacked a Jordanian Boeing 727 in Beirut, forcing the plane to fly to Cyprus, Sicily, and then back to Beirut the next day before releasing the passengers and crew.  After releasing the passengers, the hijackers proceeded to blow up the aircraft.  They then escaped, disappearing into the Shiite-controlled territory around the airport.On September 13 1987, Fawaz Younis, believed to have been the leader of the terrorist cell involved in this hijacking (and also thought to have been involved in the 1985 hijacking of a TWA Boeing 727 en-route from Athens to Rome in which a U.S. serviceman was killed - see incident 4209) was lured onto a yacht by the FBI.  He is currently awaiting trial in the U.S.  Shiite Moslems have threatened attacks against U.S. interests if Younis is not freed.In February 1988 a U.S. District Judge ruled that Younis could be charged with leading the hijacking, but that he could not be prosecuted for allegedly assaulting passengers and blowing up the Jordanian Airline jet. The judge did not dismiss six conspiracy and hijacking counts of the indictment and upheld the use of Navy vessels that transported Younis after his arrest aboard the FBI-chartered yacht in the Mediterranean.  Younis claims that Lebanese Justice Minister Nabih Berri approved the hijacking.On March 14, 1989, Younis became the first person convicted of criminal charges under provisions of a 1984 law that makes holding Americans hostage anywhere in the world a crime.  While being convicted of air piracy and the seizure of hostages, Younis was found innocent of charges that he helped destroy the aircraft.In October, 1989, Fawaz Younis was sentenced to 30 years for the hijacking. He will be eligible for parole in eight years.
GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC.  East German authorities foiled a plot by two persons carrying diplomatic passports from a Middle Eastern country, to hijack a U.S. airliner in West Berlin.  The act was carried out in support of hijackers of the TWA jetliner.  Security agents, acting on a tip, arrested the two at East Berlin's Schoenefeld Airport and found explosives in their bags.
ISRAEL.  Two large bombs, set to explode during peak shopping hours, were found in Tel Aviv.  Both devices were safely defused.  The PLO claimed responsibilty.
EL SALVADOR.  The Central American Workers' Revolutionary Party, one of the combat groups under the Farabundo Marti umbrella, claimed responsibility for a machinegun attack on a sidewalk cafe in San Salvador which killed 13, including 4 U.S. off-duty Marine Embassy guards and two American businessmen.  Ten terrorists dressed in military attire attacked the cafe, leaving a communique indicating that their primary target had been the Marines.In 1988 a military appeals court ordered three suspected participants in this slaying freed under El Salvador's sweeping amnesty law that was adopted to conform with a regional peace plan.  Strong U.S. protest over this ruling resulted in the suspects being held while the government seeks an appeal.In May, 1991, a Salvadoran military court sentenced three alleged leftist rebels to prison terms ranging from four to 25 years for the killings.A report in May 1997 indicated that one of the men accused of the attack was living in the United States.  He is currently trying to apply for a visa.
ISRAEL.  A bomb exploded near a bus stop in the northern part of Jerusalem, injuring an eight-year-old boy.  The PLO claimed responsibility.
LEBANON.  Alfred Yaghobzadeh, an Iranian citizen who was working for a French photo agency, was kidnapped near his hotel in West Beirut by members of Hezbollah.   His captors believed he was a spy.  He was released after 50 days in captivity.
GREECE.  An explosive device went off under a car owned by a U.S. serviceman, triggering a fire that gutted four vehicles parked nearby.  The blast occurred just outside a seaside hotel used to house U.S. military personnel. The Revolutionary People's Struggle (ELA) claimed responsibility, as did a group called Anti-Imperialist, Anti-American Struggle.  In a note, the ELA criticized the Anti-Imperialist, Anti-American Struggle for claiming responsibility for the act.
CHILE.  A bomb exploded at the headquarters of the Chilean-American Cultural Center in Santiago.
CHILE.  The Manuel Rodriguez Front has claimed responsibility for incendiary attacks on six Mormon churches in Antofagasta, Lotta and Coronel.  No one was injured in the attacks.  Pamphlets left at the scene read: Yankees get out of Easter Island.
LEBANON.  Three unidentified gunmen attacked and critically wounded Harout Madenlian, an A.R.F. member, and respected leader of the Armenian community in Lebanon.  The attack took place when Madenlian was parking his car in his garage in the Zarif section of Beirut.
LEBANON.  Two Polish journalists were kidnapped in West Beirut.
KUWAIT.  High-powered bombs went off at two popular cafes in Kuwait City, leaving 11 people dead and 89 wounded.  The deaths included a top Kuwaiti security official in charge of criminal investigations who, according to a communique put out by the Arab Revolutionary Brigades, was the intended target of the attacks.  This group is believed to be affiliated with Abu Nidal. A third bomb was defused in a coffee house in Kuwait City. In January 1987, two men were sentenced to death upon conviction of having planted the bombs in the cafes.  A third defendant was sentenced to life imprisonment, and a fourth accessory received a three-year term.
CYPRUS.  The PLO's acting chief representative in Cyprus, Malath Abdo, escaped uninjured when a bomb wrecked his home in a Nicosia suburb.  Abdo and his family were asleep when the explosion occurred.  His father-in-law was slightly injured in the blast.
ZIMBABWE.  Spain's ambassador to Zimbabwe was beaten to death and his partially clothed body dumped on a farm road outside the capital of Harare.
DENMARK.  A U.S. Northwest Orient Airlines office was bombed by Islamic Jihad in Copenhagen.  Twenty two people were injured in the attack.  A synagogue and a Jewish rest home were also bombed.
TURKEY.  Jordanian envoy Ziyad Sati was shot three times in the head as he stopped for a red light in a residential area of Ankara.  The gunman escaped on foot.  An anonymous caller said that Sati was killed because of his services to imperialism.  Black September also claimed responsibility.  In October of 1986, six confessed members of an Abu Nidal terrorist cell were arrested and held responsible for the assassination. In November 1986, a Syrian diplomat indicted for organizing the murder was recalled to Damascus.
LEBANON.  A young suicide bomber drove a car packed with explosives near an Israeli patrol in southern Lebanon, killing himself and a passing villager and wounding three Israeli soldiers.  Israeli state radio said the car was driven by a 13-year old boy, but the group who claimed credit, the Syrian Social Nationalist Party, denied this.
LEBANON.  Four men with rifles seized the Lebanese operations manager of ABC News in Beirut as he was on his way to the airport to go to the U.S. for a medical checkup.  Shakib Hmeidan was released unharmed a few days later.
LEBANON.  Gunmen kidnapped a Canadian relief worker in southern Lebanon. Robert Burkholder was seized in the Shiite Moslem market town of Nabatiyeh by unidentified men with guns who bundled him into a car. He was freed later in the day.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  The body of an American enlisted man was found in the woods outside Wiesbaden.  His identity papers were not found on him and his identity card was later received by a news agency in Frankfurt. Authorities suspect that the man was killed in order to obtain his identity card to enable them to access the U.S. Air Force Rhein-Main Base near Frankfurt.  A bomb at this base the same day killed two people and wounded twenty others.  After considerable delay, the RAF issued a statement admitting responsibility for the murder.
THAILAND.  A bomb exploded outside the Israeli Embassy in Bangkok, blasting a large crater in the ground but causing no injuries.  No one claimed responsibility.
SPAIN.  Three French-owned vehicles were set on fire in Saint-Sebastien. There were no injuries but the cars were destroyed.
NICARAGUA.  A group of Misura (Miskito, Sumu, and Rama) Indians kidnapped a female German biologist.  She was freed three weeks later.
ISRAEL.  A bomb-laden car was discovered in the central bus station in Netanya.  The area was evacuated and the device detonated by the bomb squad.  The PLO claimed responsibility.
LEBANON.  Mohammed Shihani, a pro-Arafat PLO member, was assassinated in Southern Lebanon.
ISRAEL.  An Israeli civilian was stabbed in the neck near the Damascus Gate in Jerusalem by a Palestinian attacker.
ISRAEL.  A bomb exploded in the Gilo suburb of Jerusalem.  Six Israelis were wounded.  The Abu Musa faction of the PLO claimed responsibility.
GREECE.  Eighteen British tourists were injured when a man threw two hand grenades into the swimming pool and poolside area of a Greek hotel.  Police said they think the attack was linked to the arrest last week of a Palestinian carrying a suitcase full of weapons near the Jordanian Embassy in Athens.  A woman telephoned a Greek newspaper to claim the incident for Black September.
COLOMBIA.  Two gunmen who had just attacked the Chilean ambassador's official residence and embassy opened fire on the Salvadoran embassy in the same Bogota neighborhood.
GAZA STRIP.  An Israeli truck driver was stabbed to death in a Gaza town.
A remote-detonated car bomb exploded near a van carrying paramilitary civil guards in Madrid.  The blast injured sixteen of the guards and two civilians who were passing by, including Eugene Brown, an American businessman.  The van was transporting the guards to stations at embassies in the area.  The separatist organization Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) claimed responsibility for the attack.  Witnesses saw two men and a woman leave the scene of the bombing in a taxi after forcing the driver to take them.  The taxi driver was later found in the trunk of the vehicle.  Some news reports stated that the individuals exchanged fire with the guards as they drove away.Eugene Brown of New Jersey worked for Johnson and Johnson.  He was jogging when the explosion occurred.  He suffered injuries to his chest and neck and underwent two rounds of surgery at a nearby hospital.  He died two days after the attack on 11 September.  He was the first American to be killed in an attack by ETA and the 29th victim this year.This was the first time that ETA detonated a car bomb in Madrid, however was the fourth car bomb attack on security forces this year and the fourth time an attack has been carried out in the capital in the last eight months.
LEBANON.  The Italian Embassy reported that an Italian businessman, Alberto Molinari, was abducted in Beirut by unknown gunmen.
GREECE.  A bomb exploded at the Athens branch of Citibank, causing minor damage.  The Khristos Kasimis organization claimed responsibility. Three people were arrested.
DENMARK.  Bombs were found near the Israeli Embassy and near the residence of the Israeli ambassador.
ARGENTINA.  A powerful bomb exploded at the Torre de los Ingleses (British Tower) in Buenos Aires.  The blast caused considerable damage but claimed no victims.  Several anti-British slogans were spray painted along the walls, but no group claimed responsibility.
LEBANON.  Syria is said to be behind the assassination of Fatah official Kamil Husayn as he was leaving his house in the Ayn al-Hulwah camp in southern Lebanon.
ISRAEL.  Israeli police safely defused a car bomb in the middle of the Jewish orthodox neighborhood of Mea Sharim.  The explosives were found after a local shopkeeper called police and told them of a suspicious- looking white Volkswagen parked near his establishment.  Police called on the population to be vigilant during the current period of Jewish religious holidays.  The abortive attack was claimed by the PLO's Force 17.
TUNISIA.  A letter bomb, addressed to the Tunisian information media, exploded at a postal center in Tunis, injuring a post office employee. A Libyan national, carrying a diplomatic passport, had entered Tunisia with several packages and left them at the Libyan General Commission in Tunis.  The packages were actually greeting cards from Italy whose two sides are linked by a thin metal string.  They have two small batteries of the cadmium cell type (the type used in watches), in addition to explosive materials.  The parcels were delivered to a number of postal centers in the capital.
FRANCE.  In Bayonne, two people were killed and two others wounded in an attack on a bar.  Spanish Basques are suspected.
LEBANON.  Two British women, Amanda McGraw (a teacher at the American University of Beirut) and Hazel Moss (former manager of a Beirut restaurant) were kidnapped by Hizballah.  They were released 13 days later.
FRANCE.  An unidentified person threw a burning missile inside a Greenpeace bus which was parked while members of the ecologist movement were distributing pamphlets in Perpignan.  The bus was only slightly damaged.
LEBANON.  Three Soviet diplomats and a doctor from the Soviet Embassy in Beirut were kidnapped at gunpoint in predominantly Moslem West Beirut in a move calculated to bring pressure against the Soviet Union to end factional fighting in the northern port of Tripoli.  Gunmen dragged the four Soviets from their official cars and fired bullets at their feet. A group called the Islamic Liberation Organization claimed that all four would be executed very soon unless Moscow were to bring pressure on its ally Syria to halt the annihilation of Moslems in Tripoli with Soviet tanks and artillery guns. The kidnappings were the first involving Soviet Bloc diplomats in Beirut. Thirty-five other foreigners have been seized in a series of kidnappings that began in early 1984 and fourteen of them (six Americans, three Britons, four French and an Italian), are still missing. Authorities identified the kidnapped Soviets as Valery Kornev, Oleg Spirin, Arkady Katakov and Nikolai Versky.  One of the Soviets was killed October 2.  The other three were released on October 30.  A Soviet intelligence unit arrived in Lebanon during the last week of October to review the case of the missing Soviet diplomats and to determine the feasibility of mounting a military operation to free them if they were located.  The Islamic Liberation Organization made a statement commenting that the Soviets had been released as a goodwill gesture.  The Islamic Liberation Organization is dominated by Sunni Moslems who have been losing territory and influence to Soviet and Syrian-backed militias.  The group indicated it still views the Marxists as opponents but considers the U.S. and Israel the primary enemies.
FRANCE.  Two bombs placed inside cars belonging to Chilean diplomats exploded at the doors of the Chilean diplomatic mission.
ARGENTINA.  A powerful bomb exploded in front of a Jewish kindergarten, seriously damaging buildings, but causing no casualties.  The Argentine Interior Minister ordered all state and private schools be granted police protection.
ISRAEL.  Three miles from where the bodies of a young Israeli couple were found, authorities found the body of a third Israeli, a farmer named Haim Falah.  Although the killing appeared to be a terrorist act, the case was not immediately linked with the case involving the couple who were killed by Force 17.
GREECE.  A bomb exploded in the Libyan Airlines office in Athens.  There was considerable damage but no injuries.  A group calling itself the Libyan Organization of 7 April claimed responsibility.
ITALY.  A police dog detected a bomb in the false bottom of a suitcase carried by a man traveling on a Moroccan passport.  The bomb, weighing slightly more than seven pounds, was found in the luggage of Ben Kramy upon his arrival at Rome's Leonardo da Vinci Airport from Baghdad, Iraq.  The bomb was described as a mixture of lead and chemicals, roughly five times more powerful than TNT.
LEBANON.  Six people were killed when an American-owned Christian radio station became the target of a terrorist raid.  Guards apparently surprised four terrorists who were setting charges to blow up the installation.  A gun battle ensued and the explosives detonated, killing the terrorists, a guard and a technician working inside the station.  Sources estimated that the four attackers carried a total of more than 200 pounds of high explosives. The station, known as the Voice of Hope, is owned by High Adventures, a California-based Christian missionary organization. Referring to the puppet Voice of Hope, the National Resistance Front said in a statement from Beirut that the four terrorists were members of the Lebanese Communist Party.
MOZAMBIQUE.  Two Jesuit missionaries were kidnapped in Mozambique by guerrillas of the National Resistance Movement (MNR).  The pair, both Portuguese citizens, were found dead in early November.
LEBANON.  Two employees of Japan's embassy in Beirut were kidnapped by militiamen but released a week later in an exchange of prisoners.
GREECE.  Police dismantled a bomb discovered in the building housing TWA in Athens.  No group claimed responsibility.
CYPRUS.  Moments before the manager of Iraqi Airlines was killed by a car-bomb while on his way to work, the Nicosia office of Iraqi Airlines was bombed by the Eagles of the Revolution( a unit of al Sa'iqa).  The group said the two bombings were to eliminate undercover Iraqi intelligence centers and promised that more operations against Iraqi targets were to come.
EGYPT.  Egyptian authorities arrested four Libyans who were thwarted in their attempt to assassinate a group of Libyan exiles, including a former Libyan Prime Minister who was the intended target of a foiled Libyan plot in Egypt a year ago.  The hit squad was made up of Libyans trained by Qadhafi to carry out assassinations.  They had been under surveillance by Egyptian authorities since they entered the country November 2.  The four were videotaped the day before the attack looking around at the house where the assault was to be carried out.  The next day twelve or so Libyan guests arrived at the house for lunch.  When the Libyan hit squad started moving their car in towards the farm, the police, who were in an ambulance, blocked their way and arrested them at the door to the farm.  A shootout with police ensued and a hand grenade was taken from the pocket of one of the Libyans.
GREECE.  Two unidentified persons shot and killed an Egyptian national employed by an import-export firm in Athens.  The victim was gunned down on the street while walking with his wife and four children.  Arabs are suspected.
GREECE.  An Egyptian jetliner carrying more than 100 people on a flight from Athens to Cairo was hijacked by terrorists who originally identified themselves as members of Egypt Revolution.  Ten minutes out of Athens, the hijackers began frisking the passengers and collecting passports.  During the passport check, one of the terrorists came across an Egyptian security guard who pulled out a gun and killed the terrorist.  A gunfight between the other terrorists and the security guard ensued, and the guard was killed.  The gunfight depressurized the plane, which was forced to land in Malta.  The airport landing lights had been turned off.  Tension built steadily once the plane was on the ground, and the terrorists began systematically shooting passengers.  An Israeli girl, selected by her passport, was the first to be taken to the plane's platform and killed. Five minutes later, another Israeli girl was shot; she remains brain dead. Three Americans were selected after that.  One of them was killed and two of them survived, although the hijackers believed them to be dead. With the permission of the Maltese government, an Egyptian anti-terrorist unit stormed the plane in a lightning assault.  The terrorists threw three phosphorus grenades in the front and rear of the plane, which started large fires and spread burning shrapnel.  In all, sixty people were killed, including four of the hijackers.  One of the hijackers survived the attack, although he remains in critical condition. The action was later claimed by the Palestinian guerrilla group headed by Abu Nidal.  Egypt is accusing the Libyan government of direct involvement in the attack.  One of the hijackers, Omar Mohammed Ali Rezaq, a Palestinian from Lebanon, was convicted and sentenced to 25 years in prison in Malta.  He was released after seven years due to pressure from Libya and went to Ghana, where he was held in custody.  With the cooperation of Ghana and Nigeria, the FBI arrested him in Nigeria in July 1993.
CHILE.  A bomb went off in front of the South African Embassy's Commercial and Information Department office.  Apparently the bomb had been left on top of the Commercial Affairs secretary's car.  The car was blown apart.
BELGIUM.  The Communist Combattant Cells bombed the NATO fuel pipeline in central Belgium.
FRANCE.  Bombs exploded minutes apart in two adjacent department stores in Paris packed with Christmas shoppers, injuring at least 25 people, eight seriously (most likely many more were injured in total).  The Palestine Liberation Front, Islamic Jihad and ASALA all claimed responsibility.  In a phone call, a Palestinian said the bombing was against the French-Iranian rapproachment.  A French delegation is due to go to Tehran next week to try to improve relations. Witnesses said two men fled in a car moments after the explosions.At the time of February, 1986 attacks in France, a group calling itself the Committee for Solidarity with Arab and Near East Political Prisoners (CSPPA) an offshoot of LARF, claimed these earlier attacks and demanded the combined release of Georges Ibrahim Abdallah, pro-Iranian Anis Naccache, head of the commando against former Prime Minister Chapour Bakhtiar, and Armenian Waroujian Garabedjian, convicted for the Orly bombing in July 1983.
BELGIUM.  An unidentified gunman shot and wounded a security guard at a U.S. firm opposite NATO headquarters, where a meeting of the alliance's foreign ministers was taking place.  The guard was hit twice after entering the offices of Control Data Belgium at 6:40 a.m. to investigate a broken window.  The gunman fled.
ISRAEL.  The Palestinian Revolution Forces General Command claimed responsibility for placing several explosive charges in a bus station in Erez.  A huge fire resulted.
ISRAEL.  A bomb exploded outside a fast food restaurant across from City Hall in downtown Tel Aviv.  One person was injured.
ANGOLA.  Two female Brazilian Baptist missionaries along with two Angolans were kidnapped on the road to Kaluquembe by UNITA.   Their landrover was attacked and they were taken.
ITALY.  The Islamic Cultural Center in Rome was destroyed by fire and five Arabs were arrested.  The center is financed by the Arab League.
LEBANON.  An explosive device went off inside a car belonging to Ahmad Baha' al-Rida, director of the Mobil Distribution Company in Tripoli.  The car was parked in the lot allocated for employees of the oil installation.
SRI LANKA.  British journalist, Penelope Willis, was kidnapped by members of the Eelam Revolutionary Organization of Students.  The Tamils had accused her of being a spy.  Willis was released on February 18, at which time she told the press that her treatment had been rough.
SPAIN.  ETA machine-gunned a French truck outside San Sebastian.  No one was injured in the attack.
ITALY.  In what appeared to be an act of sabotage, two 135-ton hydrofoil boats flying Cypriot flags were sunk while docked for repairs at a Messina shipyard.  Two explosions were heard and immediately afterward the two ships which were a few hundred meters apart, sank to the bottom of the port.  Bomb experts were called in when an object which appeared to be a bomb was located in the keel of one of the boats.  The ships were owned by a member of Lebanon's Afifi family and were part of a shipping company based in Limasol, Cyprus.
FRANCE.  A few hours after a bomb was defused at the Eiffel Tower, a bomb went off in a crowded bookshop in a popular tourist area of the Latin Quarter.  At least three people were injured by the blast. The Committee of Solidarity with the Arab and Middle East Political Prisoners (CSPPA) claimed responsibility.  Evidence has shown that the Iranian government was directly involved in the 1986 Paris bombings. [See 2/3/86 incident]
FRANCE.  An attack on a bar frequented by Spanish Basque exiles resulted in five people being injured.  The attackers escaped after spraying the Batxoki bar with automatic weapon fire.  Responsibility for similar attacks has been claimed by a clandestine right-wing organization.
ISRAEL.  A bus in Jerusalem was bombed, injuring six passengers.  Force-17 claimed responsibility.
COLOMBIA.  ELN guerrillas attacked a pipeline camp of the West German Mannesmann Corporation near La Union on the Venezuelan-Colombian border. The insurgents blew up a helicopter of the Helitaxi Company which was located at the site in addition to stealing explosives and communication equipment.
PERU.  Guerrillas in a speeding car threw dynamite at the Indian embassy in Lima.  No one was injured.  Sendero Luminoso is suspected.
LEBANON.  Three UN Relief and Works Agency members were kidnapped north of Beirut.  Two Palestinian officials and their Lebanese driver were driving in an unmarked car from Tripoli at the time of the abduction.
ISRAEL.  Syrian members of Al Fatah, dressed in army uniforms, succeeded in crossing into Israel from Lebanon and were readying themselves for an attack on a kibbutz when they saw Israeli soldiers in the area and fled back across the border. Once back in Lebanon, the three took Lebanese hostages as the IDF surrounded the house.  Plans outlining their attack were found in their pockets.  Two of the terrorists involved were killed and another one injured in the failed attack. In October of 1986 an Israeli military court sentenced three of the terrorists to 19-year sentences for their participation in the failed attack.
FRANCE.  The Seychelles consul and his daughter were taken hostage in their apartment by two hooded gunmen.  The gunmen had also taken another woman hostage but freed her shortly after.  They then took the consul and his daughter into a neighboring apartment.  The two gunmen surrendered three hours later.  No details were available on what their demands had been.
COLOMBIA.  The second German national to be kidnapped within a week was abducted by the ELN in Petaca.  The ELN employed the same techniques to kidnap Hans Fischborn as they had used previously.  A helicopter was destroyed by fire and its pilot allowed to go free.  Fischborn is an engineer employed by a petroleum exploration firm (oil).
LEBANON.  A driver of the U.N. Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) was kidnapped near the Palestinian refugee camp at Bourj al-Barajinah in the Shia Moslem-dominated southern Beirut suburbs.  Zahi Hamadei, a Palestinian refugee who works at the camp, was taking UNRWA staff to work in a bus when the vehicle was intercepted by a Mercedes, and he was taken away by armed men.
ISRAEL.  Force-17 claimed responsibility for a car bomb that went off in Jerusalem, killing one and injuring three others.
FRANCE.  Two people were killed and 28 others wounded when a bomb exploded in a crowded shopping center on the Champs Elysees.  The attack occurred as the new Prime Minister, Jacques Chirac, was addressing the nation for the first time.  The bomb apparently malfunctioned, as one of the two persons killed was Lebanese  and suspected of being a member of the Lebanese Armed Revolutionary Factions (LARF).  It is believed that the bomb went off just as it was being planted.  The second fatality was also Lebanese and his background is being investigated. The Committee of Solidarity with the Arab and Middle East Political Prisoners (CSPPA) claimed responsibility.  Evidence has shown that the Iranian government was directly involved in the 1986 Paris bombings. [See 2/3/86 incident]
JAPAN.  Simultaneous rocket attacks were launched against the U.S. Embassy in Tokyo and the Imperial Palace.  There were no damages or injuries reported in the attacks in which at least one incendiary device landed on the palace grounds while the Emperor Hirohito was inside and another ricocheted off a window at the embassy.  The attacks occurred at a time when security had already been tightened in preparation for the May 4-6 annual economic summit of seven world leaders, including President Reagan. While there were no immediate claims of responsibility, authorities speculate that the attacks were made by leftist radicals who had vowed to disrupt the summit and a commemoration of the 60th anniversary of the emperor's reign.  Five explosive devices--seven-inch-long aerosol hair spray cans filled with flammable liquid--were fired from compact cars found parked on streets outside the embassy and palace grounds.  None of the devices exploded.  The facilities are about a half mile apart in the center of the city.  Timers had been used to fire the devices from crude launchers rigged inside the trunks of the cars.  A third car was later found in a Tokyo suburb with three similar but unused devices attached to launchers in its trunk.
PERU.  Explosives placed in an outer garden of the Soviet Embassy in Lima caused some damage to doors and windows.
LEBANON.  Three Energa antitank rockets were fired at an empty annex of the U.S. Embassy in West Beirut.  The Umar al-Mukhtar unit of the National Revolutionary Command claimed responsibility for the attack.
LEBANON.  The National Revolutionary Command (Umar al-Mukhtar unit) claimed responsibility for an explosive device that was hurled at the British Airways office in West Beirut.  The device failed to go off.  The group claimed the attack was in retaliation for supporting the American aggression against Libya.
PERU.  Tupac Amaru guerrillas bombed offices of Citibank, IBM and Sears Roebuck in Lima.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  Two people were killed and 197 injured when a bomb went off at a discotheque in West Berlin.  Another American serviceman died two months later from wounds received in the blast.  The politically motivated bombing was aimed at the many U.S. servicemen who frequent the disco.  Two of the fatalities were U.S. soldiers, the other was a Turkish woman.  63 of those injured were Americans.  The Anti-American Arab Liberation Front, the Red Army Faction and an offshoot of the RAF, the Holger Meins Commando, all claimed responsibility for the blast.  Evidence of direct-Libyan sponsorship of this incident led to the U.S. bombing retaliation of April 14.    In October 1996 police detained a German woman and arrested a German couple and a Palestinian as well as issuing arrest warrants for four Libyans in connection with the incident.  In January 1997 Greece extradited a German woman to her home country.
EGYPT.  A small Greek cargo ship sank in the Gulf of Suez after being hit by an explosion that may have been the result of a mine.  Two crew members were reported missing.  The 1,830 Alaska II was sailing empty from Jidda, Saudi Arabia, to Suez City in Egypt to pick up oranges.
PORTUGAL.  A bomb exploded at a downtown Lisbon Air France office.  Action Directe claimed responsibility for the blast to protest France's collaboration with Washington. The caller claimed solidarity with Libya.  There were no casualties, but a nearby Trans World Airlines facility was also damaged by the blast.  On May 10, 1986 two terrorist members of the Call of Jesus Christ who were arrested in connection with the attempted bombing of the Bank of America in Madrid, also claimed to have taken part in the attack against the Lisbon Air France office.  The group is backed by Libya.
PERU.  Tupac Amaru guerrillas set off several bombs throughout Lima, including one which went off at a storage facility belonging to the U.S. Embassy.
COLOMBIA.  Ronald Rosenberg, a U.S. citizen and long-time resident of Valle del Cauca, was kidnapped by members of M-19.  Rosenberg was rescued 45 days later after the Army discovered the M-19 insurgent camp in the forest.
SYRIA.  Several people were killed and wounded in a series of explosions aboard buses in Damascus.  Syrian state-controlled radio blamed Israeli agents for the attacks.  The explosions took place on intercity buses and civilians were killed and injured; however there was no report of exact casualty figures.
LEBANON.  In reported retaliation for British aid in the U.S. attack on Libya, British cameraman John McCarthy was kidnapped in Beirut by gunmen as he was driving to the Beirut airport in order to leave the country.  The abduction came shortly after the bodies of two British professors were discovered (see 3/28/86 incident) and only hours after the residence of the British ambassador was rocketed in Beirut.  The kidnapping was claimed by the Arab Revolutionary Cells,believed to be an Abu Nidal signature.  Although the organization claims to have executed McCarthy, his body has not been found. McCarthy was released August 8, 1991.
VENEZUELA.  A bomb exploded at the Mormon Church in southeast Venezuela. The church is known for its U.S. affiliation and the attack is believed to have been carried out to protest U.S. attacks in Libya.  The terrorist was seriously injured.
THAILAND.  A homemade explosive device was thrown from a car at the United States Consulate in Sohgkhla Province, and police are investigating a link between the attack and separatists of the Pattani United Liberation Organization.
LEBANON.  Four gunmen kidnapped Ilyas Khalid Baydun, a journalist who works for the Kuwaiti paper Al-Qabas.
LEBANON.  A bomb which was set to go off in 15 minutes was spotted by a pedestrian in front of the British Cultural Center in West Beirut.  The suspicious-looking package contained 33 pounds of incendiary chemicals attached to two pounds of TNT and a time clock.  It was defused without incident.
FRANCE.  A bomb exploded in the building housing the American Express and Control Data offices in Lyon.  One person was injured by the explosion. On the walls of the building were spray-painted slogans against the American firms Black & Decker, Control Data and American Express.  Arab Revolutionary Front claimed responsibility.
LEBANON.  A French teacher, Richard Roger, was wounded and his companion, Sohra Doukan, an employee of the American University, was killed when militiamen opened fire at them from a roadblock.
KUWAIT.  Kuwaiti security forces reportedly foiled the attempt by a group of 12 to hijack a Kuwait Airways 747 en route to an undisclosed east Asian country.  The plan was to be carried out in two stages.  During the first stage four members of the group were to board the plane at the Kuwaiti airport.  Another eight persons were to join them at an airport in another unspecified location.  Sources confirmed that the eight persons did arrive at the rendezvous airport as transit passengers several hours ahead of schedule.  They carried a number of pistols and hand grenades.
SPAIN.  Two terrorists who belong to the group Call of Jesus Christ and claim to serve Libya, were among ten terrorists arrested in an unsuccessful attempt to bomb the Bank of America in Madrid. The two, who claim Libyan sponsorship, were caught while placing four kilos of explosives in the bank.  They say they were promised $70,000 to carry out attacks against U.S. businesses interests, including American businesses in Spain.  They also admitted to having taken part in a recent bombing of an Air France office in Lisbon.  Right wing Spaniards were among those arrested in the attempted bank bombing.
JAPAN.  The Middle Core Faction (Chukakuha) was believed responsible for five homemade rockets which were fired at the state guest house during welcoming ceremonies there for the leaders of the industrial nations meeting in Tokyo.  The rockets missed the Akasaka Palace and landed on the street near the Canadian Embassy, south of the palace grounds.  The missiles had been fired from an apartment house about 1.7 miles from the Palace and had been set off by a timing device.  The timing device had been used not only to fire the rockets but also to open the window.  The attackers had left the room locked.
LEBANON.  A retired French auto dealer was kidnapped in Beirut by a group calling itself the Revolutionary Justice Organization, reportedly a cover for Hezbollah.  Camille Sontag was traveling with his wife, Blanche, when they were intercepted by two gunmen in militia uniforms.  One held a gun to Mrs. Sontag's head and the other pulled her husband from the car.  Sontag was released by his captors November 11, 1986.
COLOMBIA.  A bomb exploded by the U.S. Embassy in Bogota.  The bomb was placed reportedly to protest the irrational and rabid policies of the Pentagon in Central America and Libya.
INDONESIA.  Rockets were fired at the U.S. and Japanese embassies and a car bomb went off outside a building housing Canada's mission.  No injuries resulted from the attacks.  Anonymous telephone callers in London and Paris claimed responsibility on behalf of a group called the Anti-Imperialist International Brigades.  This group is believed by authorities in Tokyo to be a unit of the Japanese Red Army.  The action was linked to the recent seven-nation summit in Tokyo.  There is speculation the attacks were perpetrated by a small extremist group with the possible support of Libya.  The police arrested a Japanese man as he tried to flee the hotel from which the rocket was fired at the Japanese Embassy.  Reportedly three Libyans who had been seen with this man are being sought.  Indonesia has the largest Moslem population of any country in the world and the current government is determined to suppress Islamic radicalism.  In September 1996 a male member of the Japanese Red Army was charged with involvement in the bombing.
BRAZIL.  A homemade bomb went off at the Laranjeiras Palace where Salvadoran President Jose Napoleon Duarte was to have dinner with the governor of Rio de Janeiro.  The bomb destroyed a commemorative plaque but caused no injuries.
PORTUGAL.  The NATO commmand post near Lisbon was hit by a mortar shell just before Secretary of Defense Weinberger arrived.  No one was injured in the attack.  FP-25 claimed credit, describing the act as retaliation for the NATO role in the U.S. raid on Libya.
MEXICO.  A Molotov cocktail was hurled at the U.S. Consulate in Guadalajara by unidentified persons.
ISRAEL.  Two bombs went off in central Israel, seriously injuring one man. One of the bombs went off near a bus station, the other near an apartment house just outside of Tel Aviv.  Earlier in the day a bomb went off at a soldier's hitchhiking post.
PAKISTAN.  Bombs exploded within twenty minutes of each other at three offices of the Saudi Arabian National Airline.  The bombs were believed hidden in bags left outside the offices. No group claimed responsibility for the attacks, but authorities suspect Abu Nidal involvement.
PAKISTAN.  A security guard was killed and five others were injured when a bomb went off outside the Pan Am office in Karachi.  Although no group claimed responsibility, Abu Nidal is suspected.
PHILIPPINES.  A French missionary was kidnapped by unknown gunmen.  He was released June 24.
GREECE.  A senior member of the Palestine Liberation Organization, Khalid Nazal, was murdered outside a central Athens hotel.  While some reports blame PLO infighting, the PLO blames the Israeli Mossad for the assassination.
GREECE.  A bomb exploded at the Italian Chamber of Commerce in Athens, causing minor damage and injury to two passersby.
PERU.  A bomb damaged the offices of Occidental Petroleum in Lima. A car loaded with approximately 100 pounds of explosives pulled up next to the building in the early morning hours and detonated a few minutes after the driver fled on foot.  No one was injured.
SPAIN.  A bomb exploded at the El Al counter in Madrid's Barajas Airport, injuring a dozen people.  The bomb had been hidden in a suitcase, and the person carrying the bag was unaware of its contents.  The bomb went off when a security man observed smoke coming out of a suitcase and ordered the conveyor belt stopped.  The bomb detonated upon opening of the suitcase. The owner of the luggage had been paid $1,000 to deliver what he thought to be a shipment of illegal drugs to Israel.  A Palestinian who had been under surveillance was arrested and he confessed to having planted the bomb in the suitcase and stated that the bomb had been meant to explode while the El Al aircraft was in flight.  The man claimed membership in the Syrian-backed Abu Musa organization, Al Fatah Uprising.
LEBANON.  In August, the wife of U.S. businessman Fa'iq Warih, reported that Warih had been missing since 6/29 when he arrived in Beirut from Damascus on a ten-day trip.  Warih is of Syrian origin.
FRANCE.  Libyan businessman Mohammed Bouzou was assassinated by masked gunmen who stormed his fashionable Versailles home.  A relative of Bouzou had been an official in the previous government and Qadhafi elements are presumed to be responsible.
PERU.  A guerrilla believed to be a member of Sendero Luminoso, slipped into the Soviet Embassy compound in Lima disguised as a messenger.  A security guard shot at the guerrilla and a bomb went off in the rebel's hands, killing him instantly.  A firefight erupted immediately afterwards in front of the embassy.  A guard was injured.
COLOMBIA.  The ELN was responsible for bombing the Zulia-Cano Limon oil pipeline near the city of Cucuta.  Three bombs went off at 1:00 am, severely damaging the line.  The pipeline was built by the West German Mannesmann Corporation and is used by Occidental Petroleum to move oil out of the fields for export.
ISRAEL.  A small bomb exploded in Tel Aviv just as nearby cafes were full and hundreds of people were on their way to theaters in the vicinity.  One teenager was injured by the blast.  The bomb had been hidden in a garbage pail behind a tree.  Police detained about 100 Arabs for questioning.
MOROCCO.  Suspected Polisario Front guerrillas in a small speedboat opened fire on a Spanish trawler, killing one Spaniard and wounding another.
PERU.  The offices of Eastern Airlines were bombed.
MOROCCO.  Four Palestinians were arrested and charged with planning to bomb a synagogue in Casablanca during the Jewish New Year (Rosh Hashanah) on October 4.  The four apparently had brought explosives into the country camouflaged as decorative objects for the purpose of placing bombs in public places.  Casablanca has one of the largest and most influential Jewish communities in the Arab world.
LEBANON.  Two Armenians were killed and thirty others seriously injured when a bomb hidden inside a suitcase exploded outside a cafe next to a police station in Christian East Beirut.  The explosion from the 15 pound bomb caused the two-story building housing the cafe to collapse. The concealed bomb had been placed at the entrance to the cafe, which is frequented by elderly Armenian card players.  The residential district where the attack occurred is home to more than 80,000 Armenians.  Although no group claimed responsibility for the explosion, Christian spokesmen have accused Syria's secret service of engineering the bombing.
FRANCE.  Two gas bombs were thrown at the Turkish Consulate in Strasbourg, causing minor damage.  No group claimed responsibility for the attack. The attackers fired shots as they fled.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  A Turkish separatist guerrilla was caught with explosives on the premises of Turkey's Hamburg Consulate. He had intended to assassinate Consul General Mehmet Nuri Ezen, but security guards had been on the alert for a raid on the Turkish consulate.
FRANCE.  A bomb placed in the building housing the offices of the American auto firm General Motors caused serious damage but no injuries.  No group claimed responsibility.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  A bomb exploded near the NATO airfield of Teveren.
SPAIN.  Basque separatists set fire to a French-registered car in Bilbao in what has come to be described as a car war in which activists set fire to French cars and trucks to protest a French government crackdown on Basque separatists living in France.
LEBANON.  Three French members of the UN peacekeeping force were killed and a fourth wounded when a bomb exploded as they jogged in southern Lebanon. Shiite fundamentalists were believed responsible.
SWEDEN.  A bomb exploded outside the African National Congress offices in central Stockholm.  Although the bomb caused extensive damage to the building, no one was injured.
LEBANON.  Frank Reed, director of a private school in West Beirut, was kidnapped from his car.  An anonymous caller claimed the action for Islamic Jihad.
LEBANON.  Joseph J. Cicippio, an American banker working for the American University of Beirut was kidnapped from the university's guarded campus in West Beirut.  The Revolutionary Justice Organization claimed responsibility.  This group is believed linked to Hezbollah.On February 6, 1987 the Revolutionary Justice Organization sent a note to a western news agency in Beirut, accompanied by pictures of Joseph Ciccipio and Jean-Luis Normandin (a Frenchman taken hostage 3/8/86). The group warned that any aggression by the U.S. military would place the captives' lives in danger.  The group is also holding American Edward Tracy, kidnapped October 21, 1986 in West Beirut.  The note also warned France about delivering arms to Iraq.Joseph Ciccipio was released early December 1991.
SOUTH KOREA.  At a time when South Korean security was intense because of the Asian Games about to be held there, a bomb exploded in Seoul's Kimpo International Airport, killing five and wounding at least nineteen.  The bomb used was reportedly similar to that which exploded in Rangoon, Burma in October 1983.  That blast was directly tied to the North Korean regime.
FRANCE.  A bomb went off in a crowded discount clothing and textile store in Paris, killing five and injuring 60.  The bomb was thrown by two men in a passing car.  Wanted posters, picturing two Lebanese men accused of taking part in the bombing campaign in order to blackmail France for the release of their older brother, and offering $150,000 for information leading to their arrest, have been posted all over France.  The two men portrayed on the posters, Maurice Ibrahim Abdallah, and Robert Ibrahim Abdallah, held a news conference in Tripoli, Lebanon, denying their involvement in the bombings.
LEBANON.  The Front of Justice and Revenge claimed responsibility for the assassination of the French military attache outside the embassy in Christian East Beirut.  A lone assassin shot Col. Christian Goutierre three times in the head at point-blank range.  In London the Anti-Imperialist International Brigade also claimed responsibility for the assassination. The caller stated that until Georges Abdallah is released from a French prison, assassinations of French diplomats will continue.  Hussein Moustapha Tlayss was sentenced to life imprisonment with hard labor in October 1996.
SRI LANKA.  A German engineer attached to the Deutsche Welle radio relay station was killed by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam because the engineer had gotten involved in a dispute between rival terrorist groups.
AFGHANISTAN.  Afghan rebels attacked the Soviet Embassy in Kabul, killing two Soviet children and a guard.  There were conflicting reports on whether a rocket or a bomb caused the explosion.
COLOMBIA.  The Chilean Embassy in Bogota was attacked by gunfire.  No group claimed credit.
SUDAN.  Two Eritrean refugees have confessed to a car bomb which killed one Eritrean leader and injured another.  The police sources attribute the incident to disputes between Eritrean warring factions.
SPAIN.  ETA claimed responsibility for bombs at three Renault auto dealerships, a Citroen showroom and two attacks at Crueset and Rossignol companies in Barcelona and one on a Kronenbourg beer shop at Lasarte.  Four passers-by were injured by the blasts.
TURKEY.  An unidentified group of armed men attacked a NATO radar station in Mardin, in southwestern Turkey.  This was the first attack against a NATO installation in Turkey.  Damage was minor.
LEBANON.  Edward A. Tracy, an American salesman of the Koran, was kidnapped in Beirut by the Revolutionary Justice Organization, believed linked to Hezbollah.  The group is accusing Tracy of being a CIA spy for the Mossad.   Tracy has been a permanent resident in Lebanon since 1976.On February 6, 1987 the Revolutionary Justice Organization sent a note to a western news agency in Beirut, accompanied by pictures of American Joseph Ciccipio (kidnapped 9/12/86) and Jean-Luis Normandin (a Frenchman taken hostage 3/8/86) who are also being held by the group. The group warned that any aggression by the U.S. military would place the captives' lives in danger.  The note also warned France about delivering arms to Iraq.Tracy was released August 11, 1991.
TURKEY.  The former bodyguard of the late Shah of Iran was shot at point blank range and killed in an Istanbul suburb.  Col. Ahmad Hamed Monfared was the third former Iranian army officer to be killed in Turkey in 17 months.  Sources said the former officers were known to be in touch with army officers inside Iran working to overthrow Moslem religious leader Ayatollah Khomeini.
IRAN.  A bomb went off near the former offices of an Afghan opposition group in Zahedan.  Nine people were injured in the attack.  No group claimed responsibility.
SPAIN.  A bomb went off at a Renault dealership in San Sebastian.
LEBANON.  Gunmen opened fire on the Iranian Embassy in West Beirut.  The embassy guards returned fire, but no one was reported injured.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  The Hind Alameh Fighting Cell unit of the Red Army Faction claimed responsibility for a bomb that went off at the IBM Corp. in Heidelberg.  No casualties were reported.  Hind Alameh was a member of the RAF who was killed during a 1977 hijacking.
COLOMBIA.  The Cano Limon oil pipeline was bombed in three different places, causing a serious loss for the jointly owned Ecopetrol-Occidental Petroleum companies.  The pipeline was bombed earlier in November and the Minister of the Interior claimed that the pipeline has been attacked more than 23 times since its completion a little over a year ago. The ELN was responsible for all these November attacks.
FRANCE.  The right hand man of one of the sons of the Syrian vice-president, Rif'at al-Asad, was found dead on the slope of a highway near Montelivar.  He had been shot through the head.
LEBANON.  An explosion took place at the Syrian intelligence center near Baalbek.  Two Syrians were slightly injured.
PERU.  A bomb went off outside an IBM warehouse entrance in Lima.  Tupac Amaru claimed responsibility.
SPAIN.  Members of ETA abducted the technical director of the French-owned Agremont Company in Bilbao and held him until an incendiary device could be activated in the building.  The building burned to the ground as he watched.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  The Mutafa Aktas Fighting Unit claimed responsibility for a mail bomb sent to the Kurt Schumacher Education Center in Bad Muenstereifel.  The group sent a seven page communique claiming to be sympathetic to the RAF and explaining that they had bombed the center because it claims it does direct intelligence work for the Friedrich-Ebert Foundation to which it belongs.  The letter had been postmarked in Kaarst, near Duesseldorf.  Only minor damage was sustained and there were no injuries.
SPAIN.  ETA claimed responsibility for arson attacks against two French registered cars and a machine gun attack on a French truck.
NETHERLANDS.  A man from Rotterdam was arrested in connection with the arson attack against a car belonging to the Soviet Embassy in the Hague.  The car was parked near the embassy at the time of the attack.  The man has admitted to having set the fire in protest against the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan.  It was reportedly a one-man operation.
SPAIN.  The Renault and Peugeot auto dealerships were bombed near Bilbao. An unidentified caller claiming to belong to ETA called in a warning before the blasts occurred; however one woman was hurt anyway by flying glass.
FRANCE.  An incendiary device was thrown at an American Embassy vehicle parked outside the residential compound in Boulogne.
GREECE.  A former warrant officer with the Iranian army, Ahmad Moshkabadi, was assassinated in Athens.  Authorities weren't sure that the killing was politically motivated.
LEBANON.  Saudi Arabian diplomat Bakr Damanhouri was kidnapped from his home in West Beirut by two gunmen.  He was held captive until March 18, 1987. No group claimed responsibility and Damanhouri, upon his release, did not name his captors.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  Iranian exile Ali Akbar Mohammadi was murdered by two unknown assailants in Hamburg.  Mohammadi was the former chief pilot of Iranian Majlis Speaker Rafsanjani.  The gunmen escaped.
ISRAEL.  The Fatah Revolutionary Council group of Abu Nidal claimed responsibility for stabbing two Jewish youths in Jerusalem.  The PLO accused them of being agents of Israeli intelligence who had tried to interfere with a Palestinian combat unit carrying out a mission.  The stabbings set off a wave of protest in the area.
SOMALIA.  The Somali National Movement kidnapped ten French doctors belonging to the group Doctors Without Borders.  The ten were freed unharmed two weeks later.
PERU.  Sendero Luminoso guerrillas assaulted the Indian Embassy in Lima with machine-gun fire and dynamite.  Three policemen were killed in the attack, which coincided with President Alan Garcia's official visit to India.
LEBANON.  A Swiss woman was kidnapped in Beirut.  Her kidnappers apparently thought she was French, and upon establishing her nationality as Swiss, her abductors released her.
LEBANON.  An Egyptian ship, Fast Carrier, was slightly damaged by two limpet mines that had been placed on the port side of the vessel.  There were no casualties.
IRAQ.  Kurdish resistance fighters belonging to the anti-Iraq Patriotic Union of Kurdistan abducted a German construction worker and a Turk in a bid to force the release of a number of Kurdish prisoners.  The two were released on March 26, 1987.
SPAIN.  An explosion in the parking lot of the American Embassy caused slight damage to windows and an embassy vehicle.
ISRAEL.  Seventeen people were injured when a grenade was tossed outside the Damascus Gate of Jerusalem's Old City as a change of shifts between two patrols of border guards was occurring.  Twelve of the wounded were soldiers.  A PLO spokesman said the attack had been carried out by a group called the Ali Abu Taouk unit.
AUSTRIA.  A letter bomb sent to the engineering firm of Grill and Grossman was safely defused.  A letter arriving simultaneously at the newspaper Kurier, accused the firm of selling poison gas equipment to Iraq. The letter bore a silhouette of a Kalashnikov rifle and was headed In the Name of Allah the Merciful.  The letter was signed The Sons of Imam Elhussein Ben Ali.  Grill and Grossman  took out a full page announcement in the paper with a denial of any such involvement.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  Following a Turkish air raid against Kurdish targets in Iraq, Kurds in several countries staged protests.  Twelve Kurds in Duesseldorf completely destroyed the office of the Turkish Airline.
INDIA.  Tamil exiles are being questioned about a railway blast in Madras that killed 25 people and wounded about 150 others.  A bomb detonated by remote control went off under a railway bridge as an express train was passing over it.  Tamil propaganda leaflets demanding the establishment of a separate Tamil state in Sri Lanka were found at the scene.
SPAIN.  Three French auto dealerships were targeted by bombs in the Basque region, however only two of the bombs went off.  A Renault dealership in Deva was badly damaged, and a bomb at the Peugeot-Talbot dealership in Zumaya caused little damage.  Civil Guards defused a bomb at the Renault dealership in Azpetia.  ETA is suspected.
PERU.  Tupac Amaru guerrillas attacked two Bank of Tokyo sites in Lima.
LEBANON.  The Revolutionary Popular Resistance Organization has claimed credit for an explosion at a Syrian intelligence unit located in the King Hotel in West Beirut.  Five Syrian intelligence personnel were wounded in the attack.
IRAQ.  A Turkish employee at a cement factory was kidnapped by Kurdish rebels.  Ali Selvi was released to the Turkish Consulate in Iraq on June 16, 1987.
PHILIPPINES.  An Australian and a Frenchman enjoying a picnic near Zamboanga were attacked by suspected Moslem rebels belonging to the Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF). The Australian was injured in the attack, and the Frenchman was taken away by the terrorists.  His body was found a few days later.
SPAIN.  Two people were injured when a car-bomb exploded in front of a French-owned bank in Barcelona.  ETA was responsible.
SPAIN.  Crude mortars which missed their marks were fired at three U.S. diplomatic facilities in Madrid.  The International Front Against Imperialism claimed credit and stated that the attacks were in retaliation for the U.S. raid on Libya in 1986.  The group may actually be the Anti-Imperialist International Brigades (believed to consist of components from the Japanese Red Army).   It is backed by Libya.
MEXICO.  Several Molotov cocktails were thrown over the wall of a General Motors factory in Mexico City by a group calling itself the Commando Internacionalista Simon Bolivar.  The group claimed the attack to be in observance of the April 15, 1986 attack by the U.S. on Libya.
ISRAEL.  In a massive security breach, three Palestinian guerrillas evaded a network of electronic and other security systems and entered Israeli territory where they planned on seizing Israeli hostages.  In an ensuing shootout with security forces, the three were killed, as were two Israeli soldiers.  Documents found on the infiltrators indicated that they were members of Fatah who planned on taking Israeli hostages to exchange for Palestinians imprisoned in Israel.  The attack was reportedly linked to the scheduled opening in Algiers the same day of the Palestine National Council.  It was speculated that the attack was part of an effort by Arafat to regain the support of PLO hard-liners.  The terrorists were dressed in military fatigues and carried rifles, grenades, flak jackets and U.S.-made anti-tank missiles.
PERU.  Peruvian rebels hurled homemade bombs and dynamite at the transportation and distribution sections of the Coca-Cola Company in Lima. Six of the 15 attackers were arrested.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC.  The Maximiliano Gomez Revolutionary Brigade claimed credit for detonating two homemade bombs at two U.S. Mormon Missionary installations on consecutive days.  The attacks were meant to commemorate the U.S. troop invasion of the Dominican Republic 22 years earlier.
PERU.  Members of Sendero Luminoso entered the North Korean Trade Office in Lima and detonated a bomb which wounded three people, including the commercial attache of that country.  In 1986 North Korea sold 10,000 assault rifles to the Peruvian government.
PERU.  A bomb exploded at the U.S. ambassador's residence in Lima.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  An American soldier was shot to death at the Headquarters of the American Forces in Zehlendorf a district of Berlin.
JAMAICA.  A train belonging to the Alcoa company was derailed by sabotage.
ISRAEL.  An Israeli soldier was stabbed to death in Tel Aviv. The PLO claimed responsibility.
LEBANON.  One person was killed in a car bomb attack against an Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps official.
ZIMBABWE.  Two West German tourists, who had been touring Africa on motorcycles, were killed by guerrillas in southern Zimbabwe near Victoria Falls.
IRAQ.  Kurdish dissidents attacked 11 Turkish vehicles in the Dehok District, located 60 km from Turkey.  All of the drivers of the vehicles were severely wounded in the attack.
ITALY.  A rocket was fired at the British Embassy in Rome.  A group calling itself the Anti- Imperialist International Brigade claimed responsibility for the attack.   This group may consist of Japanese Red Army members and is backed by Libya.
MALTA.  Pro-Libyan terrorists are suspected of arson at three tourist hotels.  Officials believe the Libyans are trying to destabilize the country's government.
ZIMBABWE.  A bomb concealed in a television set which was supposed to be delivered to an ANC official, accidentally went off when the wife of the man who had brought the set from Mozambique for delivery unwittingly turned the set on.  She was killed by the blast.  Zimbabwe officials claim this was a South African plot to kill the chief representative of the ANC.
PAKISTAN.  Two bombs were defused outside shops in Afghan refugee camps.
ISRAEL.  In Tel Aviv a man was killed when the bomb he was trying to plant in an abandoned car prematurely detonated.  A few hours later an explosive device was found and dismantled in a crowded bus station in the same vicinity.
FRANCE.  A Kurdish political refugee, who was head of the Association of Kurdish Workers, was assassinated outside his Paris home.  In December 1985, another Kurd was killed in the same Paris neighborhood.  He had been a member of the Kurdish Communist Party (PKK).  While the assassination may be a result of Kurdish infighting, the PKK claims that the assassinations are being carried out by the Turkish secret service.
ISRAEL.  Two cars belonging to Palestinian journalist Hanna Siniora were set on fire and written in Arabic on a nearby wall was the message: Jerusalem will only be the capital of Palestine, signed by the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine.  Siniora had recently announced that he would be the first Arab to run for the Jerusalem City Council.  His candidacy has been viewed as a sign of acceptance of Jewish rule by the PLO.
CHILE.  A bomb exploded outside of a Mormon Church in Santiago.  This was the second such attack in a week.
LEBANON.  A car bomb exploded in front of Syria's military headquarters in West Beirut.  No casualties were reported.
PHILIPPINES.  The New People's Army (NPA) tossed bombs at the Thomas Jefferson Cultural Center and the International School in Manila.  No one was injured in the attacks.
FRANCE.  Members of Iparretarrak (Revolution) which is a splinter of ETA, detonated bombs outside tax offices and a city hall in Bayonne France. The group's plans to attack the mid-July Tour de France bicycle race were foiled by French police.
CHILE.  A powerful bomb exploded at the front door of a Mormon Church in Concepcion.
SWAZILAND.  Two members of the African National Congress (ANC) and a female companion were murdered by white gunmen who forced their taxi off a road outside Mbabane.
UNITED KINGDOM.  A car exploded near the entrance of Kensington Palace, the London home of the Prince and Princess of Wales.  The driver of the car was wounded.  Officials believe the blast to have been caused by a bomb.
PERU.  An illegally parked car at the Sheraton Hotel exploded as it was being towed away.  22 persons were injured.  The car had been packed with 80 pounds of dynamite.
CONGO.  A man claiming to be a member of Hezbollah overpowered an Air Afrique DC 10 over Italy and ordered it flown to Geneva for refueling in order to continue on to Beirut.  The man had boarded the plane in Brazzaville, Congo, concealing a small pistol and explosives which he had wrapped around his waist.  While the plane was on the ground in Geneva the terrorist underscored his demand to be flown to Beirut by murdering a French passenger.  Panicked passengers opened emergency doors and slid down chutes to escape any further violence.  A steward who tried to overpower the hijacker was shot and seriously wounded.  A Swiss security team was able to board the plane during the confusion and overtake the hijacker.  One of the hijacker's demands had been the release from a West German prison of Mohammed Ali Hamadei, the Lebanese Shiite Moslem who is being held for his participation in the TWA hijacking in June 1985.In February, 1989, Hussein Mohammed Hariri, a Lebanese Shiite Muslim was sentenced to life in prison by a Swiss court.  Throughout the trial several threats were made against Swiss interests by a Lebanese group calling itself the Green Cells.  In July 1992, Hariri escaped from the top security prison at Bochuz in Canton Vaud in Switzerland.
CHILE.  Molotov cocktails were thrown at a Mormon Church in Santiago, causing approximately $25,000 in damage.
TUNISIA.  Explosions occurred at four hotels, seriously injuring 11 tourists.  Four of those injured were British.  The Habib al-Dawi group of the Islamic Jihad organization claimed responsibility. Members of the Islamic Tendency Movement, with links to Islamic Jihad, were convicted.
SWITZERLAND.  After the arrest of an Arab hijacker in Switzerland,  Switzerland continued to receive threats from an Arab group calling itself the Green Cells.  The annex of the Palais Wilson, a structure which once housed the League of Nations, was set on fire and officials believe that people associated with the Green Cells may have been involved.
PAKISTAN.  Two bombs went off in Peshawar, causing extensive damage. Two people were killed and thirty six injured in one of the blasts. Afghan intelligence agents are suspected.
HONDURAS.  A pipe bomb exploded at a restaurant frequented by U.S. servicemen, injuring six U.S. soldiers and six Honduran civilians.  The Americans were stationed at the nearby Palmerola Air Base.
SWITZERLAND.  A former Iranian military pilot awaiting asylum in Switzerland was assassinated by two gunmen in Geneva.  Iran is suspected of direct involvement.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  Four cars parked at an American military complex were damaged by firebombs thrown by two unidentified men. A neo-Nazi group claimed credit for the attack in connection with the death of Rudolph Hess.
PERU.  A terrorist commando machine-gunned an automobile belonging to the North Korean diplomatic mission in Lima.  The driver of the vehicle, a Peruvian, was taken into custody after being wounded by return fire.
LEBANON.  Joseph Khuri was kidnapped in West Beirut when he was found to be carrying an Italian passport.  Khuri is an Italian national whose mother runs the Italian Cultural Center in West Beirut.  Khuri's father is Lebanese.  Khuri was released unharmed five days later, through efforts of Amal militia.
PERU.  Serious damage was caused to the Lima branch of the Bank of London by an explosion believed to have been perpetrated by Tupac Amaru.
FRANCE.  Iranian counterrevolutionaries were responsible for an attack on an Iranian airlines office in Paris.
PAKISTAN.  A bomb went off at a fruit stand in Peshawar, injuring 25 and killing two.  This was the second bombing on the same date.  Afghan agents are suspected.
PERU.  An explosion at the Lima branch of Citibank is being attributed to the Tupac Amaru group.
ISRAEL.  The Palestinian Revolutionary Forces General Command claimed responsibility for fatally stabbing two Israeli soldiers on patrol in the Ramat section of Tel Aviv.
ZAMBIA.  A parcel bomb exploded as the package was being unloaded from a Zambian Posts and Telecommunications Services truck.  The parcel, which had been mailed from South Africa, killed a PTS employee and wounded seven others.  South African agents were blamed by the Zambian government.
PERU.  Armed members of Tupac Amaru occupied the offices of the French news service in Lima.
VENEZUELA.  A grenade was thrown from a passing car at the Italian Consulate in Caracas. Only minor damage resulted.
PERU.  For the second time in twenty-four hours, the MRTA bombed the Bolivian Embassy.  The damage from the second attack was more serious.
PAKISTAN.  A bomb exploded at an Iranian cultural center, destroying a wall and the home of the center's chauffeur.  It also caused substantial damage to a nearby building.  Though the blast was the second to occur in Pakistan within 24 hours, it was the first attack aimed at an Iranian target since the wave of bombings hit Pakistan this year.  Afghan agents are being held responsible.
SPAIN.  Eight people were injured when a bomb blew up outside the doors of the American Consulate in Barcelona.  The Terra Lliure separatist group claimed responsibility.
LEBANON.  The North Korean Embassy press attache was kidnapped in West Beirut.  A companion of his was also abducted.
FRANCE.  A vagrant was injured when a grenade was tossed at him in Paris. The Islamic Resistance Front claimed responsibility for what it called its campaign of terrorist attacks.
KUWAIT.  A missile attack on Kuwait's primary offshore oil terminal caused serious damage.  Iran was blamed for the attack.
UNITED STATES.  Three Lebanese-born Canadians were arrested when they tried to cross into the United States from Canada and a search of their car turned up a crude bomb.  On June 22, 1988, the three, who the U.S. government contends are affiliated with the Syrian Socialist National Party (SSNP) a pro-Syrian Lebanese group, were convicted of smuggling charges.  Two of the defendants received 10-year jail terms and the third received an eight year sentence.
PHILIPPINES.  NPA guerrillas are believed responsible for an attack at a Pepsi Cola bottling plant and two Del Monte pineapple facilities. Damage at the Pepsi plant was extensive.
COLOMBIA.  Mormon churches in Tunja, Duitama and Sogamoso were attacked with dynamite.  Three people were critically wounded.
CHILE.  The Manuel Rodriguez Patriotic Front (FPMR) is suspected in an attack on a Renault auto dealership in Santiago.  The facility sustained substantial damage.
SINGAPORE.  A bomb went off at the entrance of the American International Assurance building in Singapore at 11:30pm.  No one was injured.
UNITED KINGDOM.  An Indian guru was murdered as he blessed followers during a prayer gathering in London.  Three other men were shot and one later died.  Hardliners in the Sikh community reportedly believed the guru was a spy for the Indian government.
LEBANON.  Two Syrian soldiers were killed as they walked down a street in Beirut.  The Liberation Batallion claimed responsibility.  The group promised to continue attacks against Syrian targets until their troops are withdrawn.
PERU.  Peruvian guerrillas attacked a Nissan auto plant in Lima and four rebels were killed.
PHILIPPINES.  The New People's Army (NPA) carried out simultaneous attacks against two U.S.-owned Standard Philippine Fruit Company (Dole) plantations in Davao.  Damage to the plantations was extensive.
ISRAEL.  The Palestinian Revolutionary Forces General Command claimed responsibility for a bomb which exploded at a military bus station.  Several soldiers were wounded in the attack.Note: Number of injuries is approximate.
THAILAND.  The North Korean government was behind the bombing of a Korean Air passenger plane which exploded mid-air with 115 passengers on board.  The flight originated in Baghdad and stopped in Abu Dhabi before disappearing from radar screens before a scheduled refueling stop in Bangkok. A man and woman, both North Korean agents, used forged Japanese passports. They were arrested in Bahrain after having disembarked in Abu Dhabi before the airliner continued on its journey. Both the suspects swallowed cyanide pills immediately upon their arrest. The man was successful in his suicide attempt, the woman was subsequently extradited to South Korea where she was tried, convicted and sentenced to death.  She had claimed responsibility for the attack and said she had acted on behalf of the North Korean government.  In July 1989 she was sentenced to death.
CHILE.  A bomb went off at the front door of a Mormon church in Copiago.
ISRAEL.  A spokesman for the Palestinian Revolutionary Forces General Command claimed responsibility for tossing grenades into a military bus in Jerusalem.  No casualties were reported.
PAKISTAN.  A bomb discovered hidden on a tire on a railroad track was rendered harmless.
PAKISTAN.  Three car bombs exploded in downtown shopping areas in Islamabad, killing one person and injuring 40 others. As in other bombings in Pakistan this year, these were blamed on Afghan agents.  These were the first bombs to actually go off in the center of the capital.  The day marked the eve of the eighth anniversary of the Soviet troop intervention in Afghanistan.  Pakistan has sheltered and aided Moslem fundamentalists fighting to overthrow the government in Kabul.
ISRAEL.  Two people were injured when a letter bomb exploded in Or Yehuda.  Within a 24- hour period ten identical letter bombs sent from Turkey were found throughout Israel, most of them safely deactivated.  Originally musical Christmas cards, the musical components had been replaced with explosive devices.  They all contained a return address of: D. Nisim, Istanbul, Turkey.  Some of the envelopes were discovered at the post office, others by the Israeli citizens to whom they were addressed.  The bombs came at a time of high tension in Israel after the most serious and widespread unrest in the West Bank and Gaza Strip since Israel captured the territories in 1967.  There was immediate speculation that Palestinian terrorists might be responsible.
ISRAEL.  Two people were injured when a letter bomb exploded in Or Yehuda.  Within a 24- hour period ten identical letter bombs sent from Turkey were found throughout Israel, most of them safely deactivated.  Originally musical Christmas cards, the musical components had been replaced with explosive devices.  They all contained a return address of: D. Nisim, Istanbul, Turkey.  Some of the envelopes were discovered at the post office, others by the Israeli citizens to whom they were addressed.  The bombs came at a time of high tension in Israel after the most serious and widespread unrest in the West Bank and Gaza Strip since Israel captured the territories in 1967.  There was immediate speculation that Palestinian terrorists might be responsible.
UNITED KINGDOM.  An Iraqi businessman living in exile in London, was given the poison thallium, a heavy-metal element similar to arsenic and known to be used by Iraqi intelligence operators and Arab terrorist groups.  The victim died 15 days later.
EGYPT.  A bomb went off near the U.S. Consulate in Alexandria, causing property damage.  A group called the National Front for the Liberation of Egypt claimed responsibility.
EL SALVADOR.  Two suspected FMLN members opened fire on a U.S. Embassy vehicle in San Salvador.  No one was injured in the attack.
PAKISTAN.  An explosive device was thrown over the wall of a Caltex Petroleum (oil) storage facility in Karachi.  Afghan agents were suspected.
GREECE.  The November 17 organization claimed responsibility for a failed assassination attempt against U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration agent George Carros in Athens.  A remote-controlled detonating system planted in Carros' home failed to detonate properly.
PERU.  Tupac Amaru guerrillas took over the Associated Press office in Lima and forced staff to broadcast a communique.
AFGHANISTAN.  A small explosion occurred in a drainage ditch near the rear entrance of an American diplomat's residence.
ISRAEL.  Al Fatah guerrillas infiltrated the northern Israeli border from Lebanon and killed two Israeli soldiers and wounded another.
LEBANON.  The Ivory Coast's Chancellery was the target of a grenade attack.
LEBANON.  A bomb was found aboard a Middle East Airlines Boeing 707 which had just come in from Rome and was supposed to leave for Cyprus to pick up President Amin al-Jumayyil.  The bomb, which contained about 1 kg of TNT, was reportedly very sophisticated, appeared to have been made locally, and probably took about twenty minutes to install.  The bomb had been placed in the radio compartment, under the pilot's seat.  It had been primed to go off at an altitude of 30,000 feet when the plane would have been enroute from Cyprus to North Yemen.  Between Beirut and Cyprus (before President al-Jumayyil coming on board) the aircraft would have only reached an altitude of about 15,000 feet.
PHILIPPINES.  A hand-made dynamite bomb went off in front of the Israeli Embassy in Manila.  Minor damage was sustained.  There was no claim of responsibility.
LEBANON.  An explosive device was discovered before it could go off at the Ivory Coast's Chancellery.
LEBANON.  A bomb exploded in front of the residence of the Ivory Coast's ambassador to Lebanon.  The bomb, which had been placed in front of the door, caused no casualties.  This was the third attempted attack against the embassy in a month.
GREECE.  What had begun as a peaceful demonstration protesting the arrival of the U.S. supply ship Saturn turned violent when Molotov cocktails were thrown onto the ship's deck.  Six people, including two American sailors, were injured in the incident.
PAKISTAN.  A bomb went off at a bazaar in Thal, district of Kohat, killing five people and wounding 11.  Three of the dead and nine of the injured were Afghan refugees.  Afghan agents were blamed.
BANGLADESH.  A homemade explosive device was thrown into the compound of the American Cultural Center in Dhaka.
LEBANON.  An Iranian national was kidnapped in East Beirut and released two days later.
ARGENTINA.  The Che Guevara Brigade claimed responsibility for a bomb explosion at the Parke-Davis Laboratories in Buenos Aires.  The group stated in a communique that the attack was in response to alleged U.S. complicity with British military maneuvers in the Falkland Islands.
PERU.  Leftist guerrillas were responsible for detonating a bomb at the headquarters of Royal Dutch Shell Oil in Lima.  Two people were injured.
EGYPT.  The Organization for Struggle Against Zionist Infiltration Into Egypt claimed responsibility for firing bullets at the Israeli Embassy in Cairo.
NIGERIA.  Three Saudi diplomats were injured when they were fired on by a masked man  who laid in wait  in the parking lot of a hotel in Lagos.  Pro-Iranian terrorists may have been responsible.
ISRAEL.  A firebomb was thrown at a police vehicle in Jerusalem.  No one was injured.
PERU.  The headquarters of Shell Oil Company were bombed in Lima, seriously injuring two people and inflicting heavy damage.  Tupac Amaru claimed responsibility.  The group was protesting a recent agreement between Shell and the Peruvian government to exploit gas deposits in Cusco.
WEST BERLIN.  Two Molotov cocktails were hurled at a U.S. Army barracks in West Berlin by an unidentified man on a bicycle.  The suspect escaped.
CHILE.  A bomb exploded in front of the Bank of Boston in Santiago.  The Manuel Rodriguez Patriotic Front (FPMR) was suspected.
SPAIN.  A bomb planted inside a moped exploded near the Holiday Inn Hotel used to house U.S. military personnel on temporary duty.  Two people were injured by the blast.
SURINAME.  Fire was set to the Netherlands Fatum Insurance Company offices in Paramaribo.  The attack was in protest of a visit by the Netherlands Foreign Minister.
PHILIPPINES.  A Japanese tourist was killed by unknown gunmen as he drove down a street in Manila.  New People's Army is suspected.
PHILIPPINES.  Two security guards of a Japanese businessman in Davao, firing warning shots during the night to alert the household of intruders, were killed by the unknown assailants.  The businessman is an employee of the Takeda Chemical Corporation and manager of the Davao Central Chemical Corporation, a Filipino-Japanese joint venture.  The company has been experiencing labor difficulties.  Revolutionary taxes have been extorted from other Japanese firms by Marxist guerrillas who have managed to infiltrate the Filipino labor movement.
EGYPT.  A bomb was discovered shortly before it was to go off at the U.S. pavilion of the Cairo International Fair.  Security services ordered a media blackout.
ISRAEL.  A Molotov cocktail was hurled at the home of a U.S. Consulate employee in East Jerusalem.  No one was hurt.
PAKISTAN.  An explosion ripped through the offices of the Saudi Arabian Airlines just as other explosions were going off at a weapons dump and a weapons factory.  At least 7 people were injured. All of the attacks were blamed on Afghan agents.
UNITED STATES.  A suspected member of the Japanese Red Army (JRA) was arrested while at a rest stop on the New Jersey Turnpike.  His rental car contained three pipe bombs and explosives-manufacturing materials.  It appears that Yu Kikumura had intended to bomb the U.S. Navy recruiting station in New York City on the second anniversary of the U.S. air strike on Libya.  In February, 1989, Kikumura was sentenced to 30 years in prison for possession of bombs.
TURKEY.  A time bomb was defused in front of an El Al airlines office in Istanbul.
PERU.  Bombs believed planted by Tupac Amaru (MRTA) terrorists went off at two USIS Binational Centers in Lima.
COLOMBIA.  During a 20-minute bombing spree by the Andres Tamayo Popular Militia the U.S. businesses of Texas Instruments, Goodyear, Croydon, S.A., and the Hare Krishna Yoga Center were targeted.  The attacks were in retaliation for U.S. intervention in Central America.
COLOMBIA.  The British-owned Yardley of Colombia was targeted during a 20-minute bombing spree carried out by the Andres Tamayo Popular Militia.
JORDAN.  Black September claimed responsibility for a bomb which went off in the underground parking lot of a municipal building in Amman.  The group claimed the building was being used by Jordanian intelligence agents.
LEBANON.  A Libyan national disappeared in West Beirut while visiting relatives.  He was possibly kidnapped.
ISRAEL.  Three guerrillas belonging to the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine killed two Israeli soldiers before being killed themselves after infiltrating the northern Israeli border.  Two other soldiers were seriously wounded. The guerrillas were armed with automatic weapons, hand grenades, and anti-tank missiles.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  A U.S. military train en route from Frankfurt to West Berlin was damaged by explosions.  The engineer of the train was slightly injured by the blast, and the locomotive and a section of track were damaged.On November 11, 1989 two members of the PFLP-GC (Hafez Dalkimoni and Abdel Ghadanfar) were convicted in connection with this bombing.  Authorities believe Dalkimoni may also have been involved in the December 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie.
NETHERLANDS.  The IRA claimed responsibility for the murder of a young Royal Air Force enlisted man who was shot while sitting in a parked car near the West German border.  Two companions were wounded in the attack. Police reportedly counted over 20 bullet holes in the car.  The three men are believed to have spent the evening at a club in Roermond that is popular with off-duty servicemen.
COLOMBIA.  The National Liberation Army (ELN) claimed responsibility for coordinated kidnappings of consular officials throughout Colombia.  The victims included two West German honorary consuls, a French diplomat, and two Swiss trade officials.  Honorary consuls of France and Panama escaped kidnap attempts.  Several Colombian journalists were also taken hostage by the group.The ELN was protesting government policies toward multinational companies dealing in Colombian crude oil.All of the 15 foreign and domestic officials were released by May 12, 1988.
COLOMBIA.  The National Liberation Army (ELN) claimed responsibility for coordinated kidnappings of consular officials throughout Colombia.  The victims included two West German honorary consuls, a French diplomat, and two Swiss trade officials.  Honorary consuls of France and Panama escaped kidnap attempts.  Several Colombian journalists were also taken hostage by the group.The ELN was protesting government policies toward multinational companies dealing in Colombian crude oil.All of the 15 foreign and domestic officials were released by May 12, 1988.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC.  A bomb containing shrapnel went off outside the U.S. Binational Center in Santiago.
EL SALVADOR.  A Soviet correspondent from PRAVDA was kidnapped by four people near a San Salvador hotel.  The journalist had arrived in the country on May 8 as the first Soviet correspondent in El Salvador.  The journalist had last been seen at a demonstration held by the Federation of Committees of Mothers and Relatives of Salvadorans Murdered and Disappeared for Political Reasons.
SUDAN.  Terrorists in Khartoum staged simultaneous machinegun and grenade attacks on foreigners in the Acropolis Hotel and the nearby Sudan Club, killing seven people and wounding 21, including three Americans.  The hotel was frequented by Western diplomats, relief workers and journalists and the club was reserved for British and Commonwealth citizens.  Among the dead were a British family of four and two Sudanese.  Three gunmen carrying Lebanese passports and claiming to belong to Arab Revolutionary Cells, were taken into custody. In October 1988, five members of Abu Nidal were sentenced to death for these attacks.
SOUTH KOREA.  The U.S. Embassy in Seoul came under attack by a small group of radical South Korean students throwing homemade bombs.  The students were able to scale the walls of the compound in order to stage their attack.  One police guard was seriously injured.  Damage to the embassy was very slight.
GREECE.  In an act meant to disrupt the impending visit to Greece by the Turkish Foreign Minister, members of the November 17th group placed bombs under the cars of four Turkish diplomats.  Two of the bombs were diffused, the two others exploded.  No one was injured.
COLOMBIA.  40 guerrillas of the M-19 movement seized the Mexican Embassy in Bogota to protest water and electricity shortages in lower-class areas of Bogota.
ISRAEL.  Several groups affiliated with the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine and Islamic Jihad have been arrested for a series of six firebombs carried out in Jerusalem.
AFGHANISTAN.  The French Embassy was hit by a rocket.
ECUADOR.  The Israeli military attache, the Ecuadoran Air Force's top officers, and seven other military men were killed when a bomb exploded on their airplane.
PERU.  An American and his Peruvian companion were shot and killed by guerrillas believed to belong to Sendero Luminoso.   The victims worked for the U.S. Agency for International Development and were killed near Huancayo, 125 miles east of Lima.
ISRAEL.  Four members of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine were captured as they tried to infiltrate into Israel from southern Lebanon.  The guerrillas were armed with explosives and rocket-propelled grenade launchers, as well as automatic weapons.  Two of the Palestinians were injured in an exchange of gunfire before their capture.
ETHIOPIA.  The Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Party kidnapped an Italian technician in the Beles Valley.  The technician had been working on a geological project in the area.  Two other Italians were still being held by this group.  By the end of 1988 all Italians held by this group had been released.
EGYPT.  A hand grenade was thrown at the car belonging to the Kuwaiti ambassador in Cairo.  Authorities believe the attack may have been carried out by terrorists linked to either Libya or Iran.
SPAIN.  A bomb went off near the U.S. Embassy in Madrid. The Anti-Imperialist International Brigades claimed responsibility. The group is backed by Libya.
SPAIN.  A bomb exploded near the U.S. Embassy in Madrid.  The small explosive device had been hidden inside a soft drink container. Two days earlier another bomb had gone off near the Embassy as well. The Anti-Imperialist International Brigades  (backed by Libya) claimed responsibility for the attack in response to the U.S. downing of an Iranian aircraft.
GREECE.  A Greek cruise ship was attacked by Middle Eastern gunmen who indiscriminately fired automatic weapons and threw hand grenades into the crowd, killing 11 and wounding another 98.  One American was among the fatalities.  The terrorists escaped.  The attack appears to have been the consequence of a blundered hostage attempt.  A car which was loaded with explosives blew up at the port where the ship was to have anchored, killing the occupants of the vehicle.    Authorities speculate that the ship was to have been taken hostage in an attempt to intimidate the Greek government out of its plan to extradite Muhammed Rashid, a member of Abu Nidal being held in a Greek jail for involvement in two earlier incidents which targeted American airliners.A group calling itself the Organization of the Martyrs of the Popular Revolution in Palestine (Abu  Nidal) claimed responsibility.In October 1989, two Abu Nidal members were convicted of various charges in connection with this case, including premeditated murder.
AUSTRALIA.  An incendiary device detonated underneath the car of the U.S. Defense Attache in Canberra.  A note left at the scene read, Yank Imperialist Murderers Out, but mentioned no claim of responsibility.
CHILE.  Units of the Manuel Rodriguez Patriotic Front (FPMR) are believed responsible for a bomb that went off at the Bank of Hong Kong in Santiago. The date coincided with the 35th anniversary of Fidel Castro's attack on the Moncada Barracks in Santiago de Cuba, an action which symbolizes the beginning of Castro's revolutionary effort.  The FPMR has longstanding ties with Cuba.
PHILIPPINES.  The New People's Army is suspected in the murder of an Australian saw-mill operator at his home on Negros Island.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  The Provisional Irish Reublican Army (PIRA) was responsible for a bomb which went off at a British army barracks in Dusseldorf.  Three British soldiers and a West German civilian were injured by the blast.
BOLIVIA.  A crude remote-controlled bomb went off while U.S. Secretary of State George Shultz's motorcade was passing through La Paz, just missing Shultz's vehicle but slightly damaging three other vehicles in the group. No injuries were reported, but the car in which Shultz's wife was traveling was damaged.  The Simon Bolivar Guerrilla Command and the Armed Forces of National Liberation claimed responsibility for the attack.  Authorities suspect drug-traffickers' involvement.
SPAIN.  ETA was responsible for nine bombs which targeted French interests in different parts of the country.  Among those hit were showrooms belonging to Peugeot, Renault and Citroen.
SPAIN.  ETA was responsible for nine bombs which targeted French interests in different parts of the country.  Among those hit were showrooms belonging to Peugeot, Renault and Citroen.
SRI LANKA.  Tamil guerrillas were responsible for a bomb blast which killed seven Indian soldiers in Manakulam.
ISRAEL.  Twenty five people were injured when members of the Abu Nidal organization threw a hand grenade into a busy shopping center in Haifa.
LEBANON.  During September six attacks against Syrian forces were reported, resulting in at least 30 Syrian casualties.
PAKISTAN.  Five people were injured when a bomb exploded at a Karachi train station.   Afghan agents are suspected.
PAKISTAN.  Fifteen people were injured when a bomb which had been placed under a water storage tank in Peshawar exploded.  Afghan agents are suspected.
AFGHANISTAN.  Ten people were killed and 22 injured when a bomb exploded near the Pakistani Embassy in Kabul.
COLOMBIA.  The Venezuelan Consul was slightly injured when gunmen in a taxi opened fire on his car while he was driving to work in Medellin. No group claimed responsibility.  Agreements had earlier been reached between the governments of Venezuela and Colombia regarding increased border security to discourage drug traffickers.
SOUTH KOREA.  Firebombs were tossed onto a U.S. army base by radical students near central Seoul.  No one was injured in the attack.
ISRAEL.  A bomb which had been hidden inside a loaf of bread exploded in Jerusalem, injuring three children and causing moderate property damage. A similar bomb hidden in a loaf of bread at a nearby market was discovered by a store owner, and safely defused.
COLOMBIA.  The ELN claimed responsibility for a foiled assassination attempt against the manager of the Texas Petroleum Company in Bogota.  John Buttle, a Canadian national, was returning home in a chauffeur-driven car, when a remotely-controlled bomb went off as he passed a fire hydrant. The use of a remote-control device is a new tactic for the ELN.  In a communique, the group accused Texaco (oil) Co. of taking part in a dirty war against Colombian leftists.
LEBANON.  A car bomb went off at a Syrian army barracks, killing three people and wounding 32.
ZAMBIA.  Five people were injured by a bomb explosion which occurred outside a residence in the tourist town of Livingstone.  Zambian authorities blamed the attack on the government of South Africa and reported that members of the ANC were the intended targets.
TURKEY.  An American who had just arrived in Istanbul for a language conference was murdered in a park.  The victim was a translator for Radio Liberty, a Munich-based American network that broadcasts to the Soviet Union.
TURKEY.  The Islamic Jihad-Hijaz claimed responsibility for assassinating a Saudi Arabian diplomat in Ankara.  The Second Secretary of the Saudi Embassy was killed as he was approaching his home around 9:30 pm.
SOUTH KOREA.  Firebombs were hurled at branch offices of Kor-Am Bank and Citibank by a group of approximately 20 radical Korean students.
PERU.  The home of a French priest was bombed and the intended victim arrested after police discovered Tupac  Amaru literature in the ruins of his home.  Authorities suspect the Rodrigo Franco Command.
EGYPT.  The U.S. military attache was severely injured by a bomb blast which occurred at his home in Al-Jizah in the greater Cairo metropolitan area.
COLOMBIA.  Italian businessman Enrico Sciappa was kidnapped while driving in the La Merced district of Cucuta, near the Venezuelan border.  Sciappa is an executive with the coal exporting firm Incolminex.
LEBANON.  Peter Winkler, a Swiss Red Cross member, was kidnapped by three gunmen near Sidon.  Winkler was released December 16, 1988. Abu Nidal was implicated in this abduction.
CHILE.  Terrorists in ski masks threw Molotov cocktails into a Mormon Church.  No one was injured.
ISRAEL.  Two firebombs were thrown at the U.S. Consulate in East Jerusalem.  No one was injured in the attack.
PAKISTAN.  Iranian refugees waiting outside a United Nations agency office in Karachi were fired on by a masked gunman.  One person was killed and another five people injured in the attack.
SPAIN.  ETA firebombed a branch of the French food firm Danone near Bilbao.
FRANCE.  Three small bombs exploded at an immigrant hostel in southern France near Nice, where a large number of North African immigrants live. One person was killed and another 12 injured by the blasts.  Anti-muslim pamphlets were found at the scene and a group calling itself Masada claimed responsibility.  The same group claimed responsibility for a similar attack in Cannes the previous May.
JAPAN.  A tear-gas device was hurled into a nightclub known to be frequented by American servicemen in Okinawa.  23 people were injured trying to escape the fumes.
COLOMBIA.  Two American missionaries were kidnapped while attending a meeting in the town of La Florida.  The kidnappers, members of a group calling itself The Extraditables, threatened to kill the hostages if drug kingpin Carlos Lehder were not released from a U.S. prison.  Roy Libby and Richard Grover were released unharmed on March 12, near the city of Cali.
SPAIN.  Two French car showrooms were bombed by ETA.
UNITED KINGDOM.  A package containing explosives was received by the Israeli Embassy in London.  The explosives were safely detonated. The January 15 Organization,a group believed to be affiliated with the Palestinian Islamic Jihad, claimed responsibility.
ZAMBIA.  A bomb exploded at the Windsor Hotel in Livingstone, killing one person.  Zambian authorities blame agents of the South African government for the attack.
TURKEY.  Coordinated bomb attacks were carried out against three U.S.-Turkish business concerns in Istanbul and Ankara by the left-wing group Dev Sol.  In each attack groups of five armed terrorists tied up office employees, spray-painted slogans, and set off explosives in unoccupied areas of the targeted buildings.  While property damage was extensive, there were no casualties.
EL SALVADOR.  A senior U.S. Embassy security official (a Salvadoran national) was wounded in a shooting incident.  Circumstances surrounding the attack were not reported.
LEBANON.  The Soviet Embassy in Beirut was hit by a rocket.
PAKISTAN.  An American Express office was set on fire amid protests over Salman Rushdie's book.
LEBANON.  American citizen Gail Harfouche was killed by unidentified gunmen as she drove through a small town with her infant son, who was not injured.  Harfouche was married to a local Sunni Moslem.  Fundamentalist Moslems are suspected in the attack.
UNITED KINGDOM.  A  London mosque was firebombed amid tension from the Rushdie affair.  Pro-Iranian extremists are suspected.
PERU.  A small explosive device was thrown at the U.S. Embassy in Lima. Sendero Luminoso is suspected.
UNITED STATES.  Two Berkeley, California bookstores and a New York newspaper office were the targets of firebombs related to the international Salman Rushdie affair.  The Riverdale Press in the Bronx had recently published an editorial which supported Rushdie's book, The Satanic Verses.
ITALY.  Five bookstores in the city of Padua and the region of Emilia were set on fire after displaying Salman Rushdie's book.  Before the fires someone claiming to represent the Islamic Jihad had called a newspaper office in Padua and threatened to launch a wave of bombings against Italian bookstores if Rushdie's book were not removed from shelves.
ITALY.  Five bookstores in the city of Padua and the region of Emilia were set on fire after displaying Salman Rushdie's book.  Before the fires someone claiming to represent the Islamic Jihad had called a newspaper office in Padua and threatened to launch a wave of bombings against Italian bookstores if Rushdie's book were not removed from shelves.
LEBANON.  Hezbollah claimed responsibility for a roadside bomb which wounded two Israeli soldiers and four others on a main road north of Israel's self-declared security zone.
LEBANON.  A car-bomb exploded in front of the Swiss Embassy in West Beirut wounding a Lebanese civilian.
ISRAEL.  Two members of the Fatah Uprising crossed into Israel from Jordan and attacked an Israeli military patrol.  One soldier was killed and another injured in an attack apparently meant to embarrass the moderate government of Jordan.
BOLIVIA.  A bomb went off at a Mormon Church in Tarija.  The Zarate Willka Armed Forces of Liberation was probably responsible.
BELGIUM.  A Yugoslav tourist office was firebombed in Brussels. The incident  was reportedly linked to ethnic unrest among the Albanian population of Yugoslavia.
FRANCE.  A small bomb caused moderate damage to the Moroccan Consulate in Lyon.  Elements linked to the Western Sahara nationalist movement are suspected.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  An immigrant housing complex was the target of an arson attack in Bavaria.
CHILE.  Heavy damage was inflicted on the U.S.-Chilean Cultural Institute in Santiago after a bomb blast in retaliation for a U.S. embargo on Chilean fruit.  No one was injured.  Shortly after the attack a call was received from a man who said, The U.S. had to pay for the fruit.
PERU.  Sendero Luminoso guerrillas kidnapped two Newsweek reporters and held them for three days while members of the group interrogated them and lectured them on Sendero philosophies.
MALAYSIA.  In another protest against Rushdie's The Satanic Verses, the British High Commission office in Kuala Lumpur was bombed.  Four people were injured in the attack.
ISRAEL.  A bomb containing 16 kilos of dynamite was discovered at a water pumping station near Moshav Ramon just hours before it was set to  have detonated and presumably caused extreme damage to agricultural land which would have been flooded.
ISRAEL.  A small explosive device discovered in the Zion Square section of downtown Jerusalem was safely dismantled.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA.  No casualties were reported after a bomb exploded on an international express train travelling through Czechoslovakia.  The explosion occurred in a rail car belonging to the Hungarian state railway.
ISRAEL.  A car bomb detonated outside of a police station in Jerusalem.
LEBANON.  Three West German relief workers, Heinrich Struebig, Thomas Kemptner, and Markus Quint, were kidnapped by Hezbollah.  Struebig and Kemptner were released the next day to deliver a message demanding clemency for Muhammad Ali Hammadi, the accused Lebanese hijacker who was being tried before a West German court.  Quint was released on May 14.  On May 16, Struebig and Kemptner were kidnapped again.
ANGOLA.  UNITA is suspected of bombing a Texaco oil facility in Luanda.
SPAIN.  ETA was responsible for bombs that went off at two Renault car showrooms in Bilbao and at a third in Zarauz.
ISRAEL.  A small bomb exploded in Jerusalem.
PERU.  A British citizen died and six people were injured during an attack by Sendero Luminoso in the Department of Ancash north of Lima.
UNITED STATES.  A South African church leader visiting the U.S. fell seriously ill four times between April and June from what appeared to be an illness brought on by poisoning from a toxic compound similar to a nerve gas or insecticide.  A doctor confirmed that the Reverend Frank Chikane, general secretary of the South African Council of Churches, had come into contact with a compound (an organophosphate anticolinesterase) which is either inhaled or absorbed through the skin.  Chikane is an outspoken critic of the South African regime.
PERU.  A Lithuanian citizen who had been working as the chief of the ecology section of the Peruvian newspaper El Comercio was shot and killed by members of Sendero Luminoso.  Barbara Dachille had been traveling in a UN Food and Agriculture Organization station wagon with the director of a South American llama project at the time of the attack.  Her companion was also killed.
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES.  Iranian intelligence agents are suspected in the assassination in Dubai of a former military intelligence colonel under the late shah of Iran.  Atellah Bayahmadi had arrived in Dubai to hold a secret meeting with three Iranian military officers.  He was reportedly on a mission for the Flag of Freedom Organization, a Paris-based opposition group dedicated to the overthrow of the current government in Iran. Bayahmadi was found dead in his hotel room, shot in the head.  He'd been wearing a bullet-proof vest.
HUNGARY.  Several soldiers were injured in an arson fire at the Soviet army headquarters.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  The PIRA was blamed for a bomb which exploded outside a British military barracks in Osnabruck.  The blast caused extensive damage, but no casualties resulted.  There was no immediate claim for credit.  Two suspected attackers fled after they were surprised by a West German employee at the barracks.  Four more unexploded bombs containing plastic explosives were discovered.
GUATEMALA.  A U.S. helicopter being used to supply a military garrison in Amacchel came under fire by guerrillas of the Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity (URNG).
FRANCE.  A parcel bomb, believed to have been mailed from abroad, exploded in a mail sorting office at the Marseilles railway station.  One postal worker was killed and two others wounded by the blast.  The bomb's intended target was not reported.
CHILE.  Two members of the Marxist Lautaro Youth Movement were indicted for an attack on a Mormon church in Santiago's La Florida District.
BOLIVIA.  The Zarate Willca group is believed to have been responsible for a powerful bomb explosion which targeted a Mormon Church in Santa Cruz.
HONDURAS.  A powerful bomb was defused at the offices of a radio project of the U.S. Agency for International Development (AID) in Tegucigalpa.  The bomb was detected by specially trained dogs.
HONDURAS.  In La Ceiba, seven U.S. soldiers were injured by a homemade bomb while on leave from Palmerola Base.  The explosive device was thrown into the group of servicemen as they were leaving a discotheque around midnight.  The leftist Morazanista Liberation Front claimed responsibility in a communique.
PAKISTAN.  The Afghan government was accused by the Pakistani government of involvement in the bombing of a bus station in Mardan and another at a railroad workers' housing area in Lahore which injured six people.
CHILE.  The Manuel Rodriguez Patriotic Front (FPMR) opened fire on a Mormon Church in Valparaiso.  No injuries were reported.
GUATEMALA.  A bomb exploded near the Italian Embassy in Guatemala City, slightly damaging the building.  There is speculation that right-wing elements were involved.
SRI LANKA.  Seven Indian soldiers were killed when Tamil militants opened fire on them inside a crowded bazaar in Velvetithurai, east of Jaffna. Many civilian casualties as well as Tamil casualties resulted in the ensuing clash.
PAKISTAN. Afghan agents were blamed for an explosion at the Chitra Hotel which injured two people.
FRANCE.  A town hall and school building were the targets of arson fire in the southeastern town of Charvieu-Chavagneux, near Lyon.  Moslems were suspected of the arson attack which appears to have been prompted by the town's mayor having razed a condemned building which housed a makeshift mosque.
UNITED STATES.  A controversial Vietnamese author was shot four times in the head and chest by two unidentified Asian gunmen in Fresno, California. Doan Van Toai had received many threats over the past few years because he advocated that the U.S. establish diplomatic ties with Vietnam.  Toai survived the attack.
CYPRUS.  An Iranian opposition figure who was a high-ranking member of the underground Iranian Communist Party and its Komala Kurdish guerrilla forces was assassinated by two gunmen after he arrived in Cyprus from Sweden. Another Kurdish activist was injured in the attack.
ISRAEL.  Pro-Iranian guerrillas fired Katyusha rockets into northern Israel from inside southern Lebanon, hitting some warehouses.
ISRAEL.  Rockets were fired into Israel from Jordanian territory in the first such attack from Jordanian territory in twenty years.  The Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine claimed responsibility.
NAMIBIA.  A South African death squad was believed responsible for the assassination of Anton Lubowski, SWAPO's only white leader.
UNITED KINGDOM.  Four Penguin bookstores in York, Peterborough, Guildford and Nottingham were bomb targets in simultaneous attacks.  The bomb in York was the only device which went off; the others were safely defused.  The incidents were related to the bombing campaign by suspected Moslem fundamentalists opposed to Salman Rushdie's The Satanic Verses.
VENEZUELA.  A man was shot and wounded while trying to place a bomb at the U.S. Embassy in Caracas.
COLOMBIA.  The U.S. Embassy in Bogota was hit by a homemade rocket which had been fired from ten blocks away.  The rocket failed to explode properly and caused no damage.  Narcotraffickers were believed responsible.
CHAD.  The Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility for a bomb that exploded on the Brazzaville-Paris flight of the French airline Union des Transports (UTA).  171 people were killed by the explosion, seven of them American citizens.Traces of Semtex were discovered in the wreckage of the DC-10.  Another UTA flight traveling the same route had been destroyed by a bomb in a baggage compartment while on the ground in N'Djamena in March of 1984. Syria reportedly financed the operation.
ISRAEL.  Two German tourists were injured when Palestinians stoned their tour bus in Bethlehem.  This was the second such attack in as many days.
PERU.  A police guard stationed in front of the U.S. Embassy in Lima was fired upon by assailants in a passing vehicle.
GUATEMALA.  Three foreign tourists, a Spaniard, a Frenchman and an Italian, were abducted from a hotel in Tecun Uman near the Mexican border.  They were released two days later after having undergone intensive questioning by their kidnappers.
LIBYA.  An Italian national was murdered near Tripoli.
SPAIN.  Two more French car dealerships were bombed near Bilbao, causing extensive property damage.
BELGIUM.  A prominent Belgian Jewish doctor was assassinated in Brussels. Dr. Joseph Wybran, an outspoken advocate of an Israeli-Palestinian dialogue, was killed while in the parking garage of Erasmus Hospital. The Abu Nidal group is believed to have been responsible.  Three separate claims for the attack were received--one from the Soldiers of Truth, which is believed to be the name given to Abu Nidal operations carried out on behalf of pro-Iranian extremists.  Two other Palestinian groups also claimed responsibility.
PAKISTAN.  A bus terminal in Rawalpindi was bombed.   Afghan agents were suspected of carrying out the bombing.
PAKISTAN.  The offices of the Saudi Arabian state airline Saudia were bombed in Lahore, injuring several guests at a hotel in which the office is located. Iranian agents are suspected.
SOUTH AFRICA.  A bomb went off at the headquarters of British Petroleum's (oil) South African subsidiary in Cape Town, and a few minutes later a second bomb went off at a British Petroleum gas station in another part of the city.  No casualties were reported.  Britain had recently ruled against placing economic sanctions on South Africa at a meeting of Commonwealth nations. Either the ANC or the Pan African Congress of Azania (PAC) may have been responsible.
SOUTH AFRICA.  A bomb went off at the headquarters of British Petroleum's (oil) South African subsidiary in Cape Town, and a few minutes later a second bomb went off at a British Petroleum gas station in another part of the city.  No casualties were reported.  Britain had recently ruled against placing economic sanctions on South Africa at a meeting of Commonwealth nations. Either the ANC or the Pan African Congress of Azania (PAC) may have been responsible.
PERU.  Members of Sendero Luminoso placed a bomb under a vehicle at the Soviet Embassy in Lima.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  The PIRA opened fire on a vehicle in which a British soldier's family was sitting at a gas station, killing the serviceman and his baby.  His wife was not injured in the attack.
LEBANON.  The Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine in Beirut claimed responsibility for a suicide attack on an Israeli gunboat off of Lebanon.  The Palestinian was killed and three Israeli soldiers wounded in the attack.
LEBANON.  Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility for the assassination of a Saudi Arabian diplomat in Beirut.  The diplomat's driver was injured in the attack.  The killing was in retaliation for the recent execution of Shiite extremists by the Saudi government for their participation in bomb attacks in Mecca last July.
COLOMBIA.  The Army of National Liberation (ELN) claimed responsibility for kidnapping an employee of the Mexican consortium Associated Construction Engineers (ICA).
COLOMBIA.  Two Mexican engineers were kidnapped by the Army of National Liberation (ELN) in the Arauca oil zone near the Colombian-Venezuelan border.
GUATEMALA.  Police defused a high-powered bomb in front of the Salvadoran Embassy in Guatemala City.
PERU.  A group of unidentified persons threw explosives at the Salvadoran Embassy in Lima.
EL SALVADOR.  During heavy fighting in San Salvador an American diplomat was held at gunpoint in his home for 14 hours by the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front (FMLN).
THE NETHERLANDS.  The Basque Fatherland and Liberty (ETA) claimed responsibility for a grenade attack against the Spanish Embassy in The Hague.  Extensive damage was caused to the embassy.
COLOMBIA.  British engineer John Johnson was kidnapped by members of the National Liberation Army (ELN) while he was traveling to the camp of a petroleum company in the eastern part of the country.
PHILIPPINES.  A grenade slightly damaged the home of the U.S. agricultural attache.  A Filipino workman was injured.
BOLIVIA.  The Zarate Willka Armed Forces of Liberation claimed responsibility for a bomb attack at the U.S. Embassy in La Paz.  The explosion caused considerable damage but did not result in casualties.
GUATEMALA.  A Nicaraguan diplomat was assassinated in Guatemala City.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC.  The Revolutionary Army of the People threw a Molotov cocktail at the offices of Codetel in Mella. The company is a subsidiary of the U.S. GTE corporation.
PERU.  The Tupac Amaru group detonated a bomb at the U.S. Binational Center in Arequipa.
PHILIPPINES.  A USIS building in Davao City was fired on during the night.  New People's Army (NPA) is suspected.
PERU.  Bombs went off at two different Mormon churches in Chiclayo. MRTA leaflets left at both sites denounced the U.S. invasion of Panama.
CHILE.  A bomb exploded inside a fifth floor bathroom of the Chilean-U.S. Cultural Institute in Santiago.
SPAIN.  The Basque group Iraultza claimed responsibility for bombing a Ford Auto dealership in Vittoria.  The group claimed the attack was in reprisal for the U.S. invasion of Panama as well as a show of support for the Basque cause.
CHILE.  A bomb slightly damaged an Australian transportation company.
BOLIVIA.  A bomb exploded outside a Mormon Church in Cochabamba.  A group calling itself the Comando Alejo Calatayud claimed responsibility.
GUATEMALA.  A Salvadoran leftist and the Guatemalan woman who was driving him to the airport were abducted near Guatemala City.  Their bodies were discovered the next day.
PERU.  MRTA guerrillas tossed explosives into the Miraflores home of several U.S. Marines.  There were no injuries.
PAPUA NEW GUINEA.  An Australian journalist was shot and wounded by Bougainville secessionist rebels.
SUDAN.  Two doctors with the relief group Doctors Without Borders were kidnapped in Malakal.
GREECE.  A bomb exploded in a U.S. military vehicle at the Araxos Base near Patrai.
AUSTRIA.  A Yugoslavian national was injured when a bomb exploded in his car.
COLOMBIA.  Three Mormon Churches were damaged by explosives thrown by members of the ELN who were protesting President Bush's imminent arrival for the Cartagena drug summit.
PERU.  MRTA guerrillas threw incendiary devices at a U.S. Embassy warehouse in Lima to protest the U.S. invasion of Panama.
TURKEY.  The American Cultural Center in Adana was firebombed by suspected leftists.
CYPRUS.  A gunboat flying a Syrian flag with a crew that spoke in the Syrian dialect opened fire on a Cypriot ship transporting passengers from Lebanon to Cyprus.  One person was killed and 25 were injured.  The Cypriot ship had been flying the Lebanese flag when it was attacked.
ISRAEL.  A bomb exploded at a bus terminal in Tel Aviv.
HONDURAS.  The Morazanista Patriotic Liberation Front (FPM) claimed responsibility for firing on a bus carrying U.S. servicemen northwest of Tegucigalpa.  Seven U.S. airmen were wounded in the attack which occurred as the bus was traveling from Soto Cano Air Base to the beach.  The FPM had been responsible for a grenade attack the previous July which had injured several U.S. servicemen.
LIBYA.  The Rabta chemical plant was damaged by an arson fire.  Five plant workers, including two foreigners, were held for questioning.  Qadaffi accused America, Israel and West Germany of involvement.
PERU.  Sendero Luminoso guerrillas failed in an assassination attempt against the resource manager of the multinational firm Bunge and Borne.
GREECE.  Timed explosive devices destroyed 12 cars belonging to diplomats from the Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, Hungary, Syria and to a representative from the PLO.  The explosions occurred simultaneously in different suburbs throughout Athens.  The leftist Social Resistance group claimed responsibility.
GREECE.  Timed explosive devices destroyed 12 cars belonging to diplomats from the Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, Hungary, Syria and to a representative from the PLO.  The explosions occurred simultaneously in different suburbs throughout Athens.  The leftist Social Resistance group claimed responsibility.
GREECE.  Timed explosive devices destroyed 12 cars belonging to diplomats from the Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, Hungary, Syria and to a representative from the PLO.  The explosions occurred simultaneously in different suburbs throughout Athens.  The leftist Social Resistance group claimed responsibility.
ISRAEL.  Two Katyusha rockets were fired into Israel from Jordanian territory.  The Islamic-Jihad-Jerusalem claimed responsibility.
SURINAME.  The Second Secretary of the Soviet Embassy was murdered near Paramaribo.  Three people were arrested.  The motive was unclear and may have been criminal.
JORDAN.  The Islamic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (IFLP) claimed responsibility for the bombing of the Jordanian-Soviet Friendship Society in Amman.  The action was carried out in response to increased Soviet Jewish immigration to Israel.
PHILIPPINES.  The NPA killed a U.S. Marine near the American naval base at Subic Bay.
PHILIPPINES.  An NPA hit team murdered two U.S. soldiers near a hotel in Angeles City.
COSTA RICA.  A bomb exploded near the U.S. Agency for International Development (AID) office in San Jose.  A Costa Rican group with ties to Libya is suspected.
CHILE.  A bomb exploded at a Mormon Church in Santiago.
SWEDEN.  Five arson attacks were directed against interests involving Middle Eastern and North African immigrants.   A refugee center in Vasteras and an Islamic Cultural center in Stockholm were two of the targets.
SWEDEN.  Five arson attacks were directed against interests involving Middle Eastern and North African immigrants.   A refugee center in Vasteras and an Islamic Cultural center in Stockholm were two of the targets.
PHILIPPINES.  The NPA kidnapped a Japanese aid worker on the island of Negros.  He was released in August 1990.
PHILIPPINES.  A Japanese executive was murdered in his Manila home.
PERU.  Two British ornithologists were kidnapped in the Alta Huallago zone by terrorists or drug traffickers.  Since the region is coca producing, it is assumed that the kidnappers mistook them for U.S. Drug Enforcement Agents.  As of October 23, when the British Embassy confirmed the disappearance, no bodies had been found, but accounts in the local Tingo Maria press attest that the ornithologists were kidnapped, tortured and killed.
ISRAEL.  The Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility for a bomb blast in a Jerusalem shopping center that killed one and injured nine others.
SOUTH KOREA.  500 radical students hurled hundreds of firebombs at the American Cultural Center in Kwangju to protest the reopening of the center, which had been closed since May 1989 because of previous student attacks.
SURINAME.  The U.S.-owned Suralco bauxite mining company, a subsidiary of the Aluminum Company of America, was bombed in Mungo.
ISRAEL.  Police defused a bomb found in a West Jerusalem commercial center.
NETHERLANDS.  A massive car bomb exploded in front of the British tourist office in Amsterdam.  The PIRA may have been responsible. (The building also housed a South African Tourist office.)
ALBANIA.  A bomb exploded in the courtyard of the Cuban Embassy in Tirana.
NETHERLANDS.  Three people were injured when ETA exploded a bomb in front of a Spanish bank in Amsterdam.
EGYPT.  Muslim fundamentalists set a fire at a Red Sea resort hotel that killed a West German and a Frenchwoman and wounded another tourist.
NETHERLANDS.  ETA claimed responsibility for an attack against the Banco Bilbao-Vizcaya in Amsterdam.
PERU.  The legal adviser of the Israeli community was shot at close range as he was driving in Lima.  Palestinian radicals, possibly elements of Abu Nidal, were suspected.  Three members of Abu Nidal were detained for questioning by Peruvian authorities in 1988.
CHILE.  Bombs went off at Citibank, Chase Manhattan Bank, the VTR Co., and an American fruit exporting company.
EGYPT.  An attack on the residence of the Ambassador of Bahrain left one policeman dead.  Muslim fundamentalists were responsible.
UNITED KINGDOM.  An American woman discovered a bomb attached to her car in London.  The house in front of which the car was parked had previously belonged to a British politician, the intended PIRA target.
PERU.  Sendero Luminoso killed two Mormon missionaries in Huancayo.
CHILE.  The Lautaro Movement threw Molotov cocktails at Mormon temples in La Florida, Ochagavia, and Santiago Norte.
COLOMBIA.  Six journalists were kidnapped while on their way to interview leftist guerrillas by the Medellin cocaine cartel the Extraditables.  Most of the journalists, including Diana Turbay, daughter of a former Colombian president, had family ties to Colombia's political elite, but one was a German free-lance reporter.  One hostage was released in November because he was suffering heart pains, and the German and at least one of the others were released in December.  During a police raid in January 1991, one hostage escaped and Turbay was killed.
PAKISTAN.  A Canadian missionary was kidnapped in Peshawar.
LEBANON.  A bomb went off near the American University of Beirut. Security officials had earlier discovered an explosive device in a cigarette package in the office of the university's president.
PHILIPPINES.  A bomb went off at the Nikko Manila Garden Hotel in Manila, injuring several people, including two Japanese tourists.  The hotel is owned by Japanese Airlines.
PHILIPPINES.  Bombs were thrown at the Coca-Cola and Pepsi Cola bottling factories in Manila, as well as at the Motorola firm.
BELGIUM.  Three armed attackers gained entrance to the home of a high-ranking American NATO officer in an apparent attempt either to kidnap or to assassinate him.  General John Douglas was not at home at the time, but his chauffeur was bound, gagged and left unconscious.
DJIBOUTI.  The Movement for Djibouti Youth (MDY) (or Islamic Struggle of Djibouti Youth) claimed responsibility for a grenade attack against a cafe frequented by French military personnel and their families.  A child was killed and 15 other people were injured.  The incident may have been carried out by locals on behalf of Iraq.  The alleged ringleader of the group, Awaleh Ghelleh Assoweh, and another member, Mohamed Hassan Farah, were arrested in Ethiopia on July 29, 1992.
PHILIPPINES.  An explosive device was thrown at a subsidiary of Vicks International in Manila, injuring one person.
POLAND.  A bomb exploded at the Kodak firm in Warsaw.
ISRAEL.  A bomb exploded near Jerusalem's Wailing Wall, injuring a policeman.
PERU.  Members of MRTA took over the office of the Italian news agency ANSA and forced the transmission of a manifesto.  The guerrillas left a bomb that the police were able to defuse.
THAILAND.  A bomb detonated in the compound of the Burmese Embassy in Bangkok.  A group of radical Burmese students was suspected.
ARGENTINA.  A bomb exploded at a British hospital in Buenos Aires. Officials blamed the Eva Peron organization.
PANAMA.  An explosive device was hurled at the Austrian Consulate in Panama City, causing minor damage.
JORDAN.  The Arab Communist Revolutionary Party claimed responsibility for a bomb that was discovered in front of the British Bank of the Middle East in Amman.  The device was safely dismantled.
IVORY COAST.  The Italian Ambassador was assassinated while dining in a fashionable restaurant in Abidjan.
VENEZUELA.  A cultural attache with the Indonesian Embassy was found murdered in his Caracas home.
PHILIPPINES.  Two men on a motorcycle threw an explosive device at the Manila offices of China Airlines.  Two people were injured in the attack.
JAPAN.  Projectiles were fired at the Atsugi U.S. Naval Air Station in Kanagawa Prefecture by the Middle Core Faction.
PHILIPPINES.  Explosives were discovered at a Shell Oil storage facility in Pandacan.
MOROCCO.  An Iraqi diplomat was found stabbed to death at a beach resort. The victim had ignored orders to return home after the invasion of Kuwait.
ISRAEL.  A grenade was thrown from a car into a busy Tel Aviv intersection, but the device failed to explode.
ARGENTINA.  A bomb was deactivated at the British Lloyds Bank.
OCCUPIED TERRITORIES.  Powerful bombs went off at a military headquarters in Bethlehem, killing one and injuring 20 others.
PERU.  A bomb went off in front of the Soviet Embassy in Lima. MRTA guerrillas were suspected.
GREECE.  The Nov-17 organization fired two anti-tank missiles at the European Community offices in Athens.  Two women were injured.
ANGOLA.  A suitcase bomb destroyed the VIP lounge at Luanda's International Airport.  The attack was claimed by the National Front for the Liberation of Angola (FNLA), a group that seems to have been inactive since the 1970s but has recently begun to distribute leaflets in Luanda.
SOMALIA. An Italian diplomat was killed when rebels attacked the embassy compound in Mogadishu as part of their assault on the capital.
PANAMA.  The December 20 Movement (M-20) claimed responsibility for having tossed grenades at the U.S. embassy.  The PLO also claimed responsibility.
ECUADOR.  Members of Alfaro Vive seized the French consulate in Guayaquil in response to the impending violence in the Gulf.  The five guerrilla members left peacefully the next day.
JORDAN.  An Amman branch of Citibank was fired on.
EGYPT.  A bomb went off at the Western Educational Institution in Cairo.
GERMANY.  Molotov cocktails were thrown at police protecting the U.S. mission in East Berlin.
BRAZIL.  Police defused dynamite outside a Sao Paulo branch of Citibank.
INDONESIA.  A bomb was discovered at the residence of the U.S. Ambassador in Jakarta.
HONDURAS.  Fragmentation grenades were thrown at the French consulate.
PHILIPPINES.  A bomb exploded prematurely as two Arab terrorists attempted to place it in the Thomas Jefferson Library in Manila.  One of the terrorists was killed and the other injured in the attack.  Two Iraqi students, sons of Baghdad's ambassador to Somalia, were deported a few days after being linked to the attack.
LEBANON.  A bomb exploded at the Lebno-Francaise bank in Beirut.
CHILE.  Bombs went off at Ford and Coca-Cola subsidiaries.
SPAIN.  Molotov cocktails were thrown into a restaurant named Cafe Bar Tel Aviv in Seville.  The restaurant is owned by a Dutch Jewish family.
TURKEY.  A bomb went off at the office of the American Bureau of Shipping in Istanbul.  Dev-Sol claimed responsibility.
GUATEMALA.  Unidentified gunmen fired at the local headquarters of the United Nations in Guatemala City.
JORDAN.  An explosive device was discovered at the British Bank of the Middle East.  The Arab Communist Revolutionary Party claimed responsibility.
URUGUAY.  Unidentified individuals shot at the U.S. Embassy in Montevideo.
GREECE.  Bombs went off at two branches of Citibank in Athens. The November 17 organization claimed the attack as a protest to the allied military operation in the Persian Gulf.
TURKEY.  A bomb discovered at an American bank in Ankara was safely defused.
LEBANON.  A bomb went off in front of the Saudi Bank east of Beirut.
TURKEY.  Dev Sol claimed responsibility for a bomb that went off at the Air France agency.
CHILE.  Two Mormon churches in Santiago were bombed.
GREECE.  A bomb went off at the Inter-American insurance company in Athens. The November 17 organization claimed the attack as a protest to the allied military operation in the Persian Gulf.
ITALY.  Two Molotov cocktails were thrown at a Coca-Cola warehouse in Milan.
LEBANON.  A bomb which had been placed in a trash barrel detonated near the Qatari Embassy.
PERU.  Suspected Tupac Amaru guerrillas tossed explosives at the U.S. Cultural Center and at a monument honoring former U.S. President John F. Kennedy.
PERU.  Five mortar rounds were fired at the U.S. Embassy from a park across the street.  No group claimed responsibility.
FRANCE.  An arson fire damaged a mosque in the northern part of the country.
PERU.  An explosion occurred at the Peruvian-British Institute in the Miraflores neighborhood of Lima.
CHILE.  A bomb placed on a window sill exploded at the Chilean-German Cultural Institute in Santiago.
YEMEN.  A bomb went off in front of the French Embassy in Sanaa.
SAUDI ARABIA.  An unidentified gunman fired on a bus carrying American military personnel in the port city of Jidda, hundreds of miles from the battlefield.  Two servicemen were wounded by flying glass in the attack.
LEBANON.  An explosion took place at an Egyptian-Lebanese bank in Beirut.
TURKEY.  An American civilian was assassinated by the leftwing group Dev Sol in Adana.  The man had been singled out because he worked at a Turkish air base and was believed to be a CIA agent.
LEBANON.  A bomb exploded near the French Embassy in Beirut.
INDIA.  Maoist guerrillas were blamed for an attack on four World Bank employees in the town of Kochi.  The bank executives were en route to an industrial training institute when the attack occurred.
GUATEMALA.  An American was found dead in the Esquintla Department.  The victim showed signs of torture.
LEBANON.  Unidentified gunmen kidnapped a French national and an Italian in southern Beirut.
LEBANON.  A stick of dynamite exploded near the Saudi-Lebanese Bank.
JORDAN.  A Jordanian man entered a Turkish Airlines office in Amman and held an airline employee hostage.  The man had a knife and what was reportedly a fake bomb.  He was protesting Turkey's Gulf policy and asked to meet with the Jordanian parliamentary speaker.  The incident ended peacefully.
LEBANON.  A rocket was discovered hidden inside a water pipe and aimed at the Italian Embassy in west Beirut.  The device was safely dismantled.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.  A firebomb was thrown through a window at an IBM office in Freiburg.  Officials believe the attack was to protest the U.S. role in the Persian Gulf war.
IRAN.  An explosive was thrown at the Turkish Embassy in Tehran. Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility.
JAPAN.  The Middle Core Faction claimed responsibility for projectiles fired at a residential area in Yokohama which is used by U.S. Navy personnel.  The attack was meant to protest the presence of U.S.-led multinational forces in the Gulf.
JORDAN.  A gunman opened fire on a Soviet diplomatic car in Amman.  There were no injuries.
TUNISIA.  A pro-Iraqi terrorist organization, under the leadership of Abu-al-'Abbas, was allegedly responsible for the assassination of Dutch diplomat Robert Jan Akkerman at his home in Tunis.  According to a PLO spokesperson, the gunmen were planning to kill about 30 dinner guests, many of them diplomats, who were about to arrive at Akkerman's home.  Akkerman apparently surprised the gunmen who fled after killing him.  In carrying out the attack, the terrorists had hoped to support Saddam Hussein in his war against the allies.Some doubts have been raised as to the motivation for the killing.  The possiblity of personal problems being the motive has been considered.
BRAZIL.  A 40-member FARC column attacked a Brazilian Army camp in the northwestern part of the country, killing three Brazilian soldiers and wounding 9 others.  The group carried off military and communications equipment.
LATVIA.  Explosions occurred outside a building used to house Soviet military families in Riga.  Other explosions occurred at a building owned by the interior ministry and under a bridge.
TURKEY.  An individual who threw an explosive into a warehouse belonging to Americans in Izmir was killed in the attempt.
TURKEY.  The Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility for a bomb which detonated in the car of the Iraqi trade attache in Ankara.  The diplomat, who was accompanied by his four children, was slightly injured in the attack.
MALAYSIA.  Pakistani hijackers took over a Singapore Airlines passenger jet en route from Kuala Lampur, Malaysia to Singapore.  The hijackers demanded the release of a number of people held in Pakistani prisons, including the husband of former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto. Nine hours after the drama began, a commando unit stormed the plane, killing the four hijackers.
GREECE.  Homemade devices exploded at two Citibank branches in Athens suburbs.
GERMANY.  A Mozambican immigrant was thrown from a Dresden streetcar to his death by neo-Nazis.
GREECE.  Nine cars, including two belonging to foreign diplomats and three with foreign license plates, were damaged by a series of explosions in an Athens suburb.
GREECE.  The Revolutionary Popular Struggle (ELA) and the May 1st groups claimed joint responsibility for an explosion which demolished two floors of the United Nations offices in Athens.
PERU.  Explosives were hurled from a moving car at the Israeli Embassy in Lima during a terrorist-planned power outage.
TURKEY.  Sabotage of a Greek tourist bus in Istanbul resulted in the deaths of 36 tourists.  Seven people were injured.
FRANCE.  An Iranian dissident was stabbed to death in Paris.
GERMANY.  A Molotov cocktail was thrown into an asylum-seekers' hotel in Berlin.
GERMANY.  A Soviet sentry was killed near his post in eastern Germany.
SRI LANKA.  Three members of Medecins Sans Frontieres were injured when their clearly-marked vehicle came under attack from a helicopter.
UNITED STATES.  An explosion destroyed a building housing three Haitian businesses in the Little Haiti section of Miami.  The Tontons Macoutes are suspected of staging a comeback in the Miami area.
PERU.  Sendero Luminoso, marking their 11th anniversary, murdered Canadian Evangelical aid worker Norman Tattersall and a Colombian colleague.
TURKEY.  Molotov cocktails were thrown at the British Consulate in Istanbul.
ITALY.  An ETA bomb exploded near the Spanish Embassy.
PAKISTAN.  A U.S. AID employee was injured in an attack by unidentified assailtants in Karachi.
ARGENTINA.  A bomb went off at an Israeli Bank branch in Cordoba.
LEBANON.  An unknown gunman assassinated a French national.
PERU.  Guerrillas in the Upper Huallaga Valley raided an American-built anti-drug base with rocket-propelled grenades.  Joint pilot teams of American civilians and Peruvian national police repelled the attack.
SRI LANKA.  The LTTE detonated a bomb under a tourist bus, then opened fire on the passengers.  14 people were killed, including a Danish tourist, and nine others were injured.
INDIA.  Soviet coal mining expert Sergei Gritchenko was kidnapped by the United Front for the Liberation of Assam.  He was killed while attempting an escape on July 9.
PERU.  Shots were fired at the U.S. Embassy in Lima.
ITALY.  A Spanish tour bus exploded in central Rome after unidentified assailants threw an explosive device into it.  ETA believed responsible.
PERU.  Leftist guerrillas threw incendiary devices at a Japanese-owned Mitsubishi Motors showroom during the night.
GERMANY.  ETA attempted to bomb a Spanish bank.
FRANCE.  Dev Sol attacked the Turkish Embassy in Paris.
UNITED KINGDOM.  Extremists attacked three Turkish banks in London.  Dev Sol or Turkish Kurdish sympathisers were suspected.
GERMANY.  A firebomb attack on a Turkish bank in Bremen caused minor damage.
GREECE.  A bomb was discovered outside the offices of a U.S. veteran's group American Legion in Salonica.  The bomb was safely defused. The 1 May Organization and ELA claimed joint responsibility.
GREECE.  Bombs went off at four U.S.-related business facilities.  The Revolutionary Popular Struggle (ELA) and the May 1 leftist groups claimed responsibility jointly.  The incidents preceded by one day U.S. President Bush's arrival in Athens.
ZIMBABWE.  A bomb explosion at a Sheraton Hotel in Harare injured three hotel workers.  A white latin-appearing male was being sought. Authorities believe that Iraq may have been involved in the incident.
PERU.  A dynamite bomb went off at a European Community-financed Land Recovery Program office in Puno, killing one victim and injuring two others.  The SL was suspected.
ITALY.  A bomb went off at the Exterior Bank of Spain in Milan.  One person was injured by the blast.  The Armed Falange (AF) claimed responsibility in the name of ETA.
FRANCE.  Shahpour Bakhtiar, the late Shah of Iran's exiled prime minister and outspoken critic of the current Iranian government, was found stabbed to death near Paris.  Also killed was his secretary.  Bakhtiar had been ousted and sentenced to death by the 1979 Muslim revolution.  He'd escaped an assassination attempt by Hezbollah in 1980 which claimed two other lives.  The house in which Bahktiar was discovered was under tight security, and police found no signs of forced entry or struggle.Ali Rad Vakli, a suspect in the assassination, was extradited from Switzerland and charged with murder on August 27.An Iranian arrested September 20 in connection with the killing is reportedly the nephew of Ayatollah Khomeini, and has implicated the Iranian government in the killing.On December 23, 1991, Swiss police arrested Zeyal Sarhadi as an accessory in Bakhtiar's assassination.  He was arrested as he left the Iranian Embassy in Bern.  In May 1992, France succeeded in having Sarhadi extradited.
ITALY.  Two bombs were successfully disarmed outside of Spanish banks.
MEXICO.  A powerful bomb went off at Citibank in the Vallejo suburb of Mexico City.  A group calling itself the Revolutionary Worker Clandestine Union of the People Party, (PROCUP) claimed responsibility.  Four nearby Mexican banks were injured by the blast.
GERMANY.  An incendiary attack on Turkish Pamuk Bank in Dortmund caused severe damage.  Kurds were suspected.
MEXICO.  Bombs went off at an IBM building and at McDonalds in Mexico City. PROCUP claimed responsibility.
FRANCE.  ETA set off a bomb at a Spanish bank in southern France.
EL SALVADOR.  A German national Roman Catholic Church relief worker was shot by two unidentified gunmen outside of his San Salvador apartment.
FRANCE.  The Spanish bank Banco Bilbao Vizcaya was bombed in Bayonne.
ZIMBABWE.  An explosive device was safely removed from the outside of the British Council office in Harare.
AUSTRALIA.  Shots were fired at the Indonesian consulate in Darwin.  The Indonesian Ambassador to Australia was visiting Darwin at the time of the attack.
BOLIVIA.  A bomb which had been hidden in a basket left by two young boys was discovered at the American-Bolivian bank agency in Santa Cruz.
COLOMBIA.  The ELN kidnapped a British teacher in early October. Victim released on November 17.
INDIA.  The Romanian charge d'affairs was abducted by two men while on his way to work in New Delhi.  Witnesses said that one of the kidnappers appeared to be a Sikh.  A day after the abduction a caller identifying himself as the commander-in-chief of the Liberation Tigers of Khalistan (LTK) claimed responsibility; however, authorities believe that Sikhs may have seized him in order to force the release of two Sikhs held in Bucharest for the August 20 attempted assassination of India's ambassador to Romania.  The diplomat was held for 48 days, then simply put on a train for Delhi.
SPAIN.  ETA was suspected of having planted a bomb which exploded outside the French Societe Generalede Bank in Pamplona.
TURKEY.  An hour after a bomb blast killed a U.S. Air Force sergeant, a bomb went off under the car of an Egyptian diplomat as he prepared to drive his daughter to school.  The victim was seriously injured by the blast.  The Turkish Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility, saying they would not allow the imperialist powers to divide up the Middle East at the peace summit.  A Turkish newspaper reported that the group had carried out the assassination because the victim had decoded Islamic Jihad's communication computer codes.
NORWAY.  Unidentified attackers threw petrol bombs at the Turkish Embassy in Oslo in the third attack of its kind in four months.
SOVIET REPUBLICS.  Four armed Chechen-Ingushi nationalists hijacked a Minerallnye Vody (RSFSR) Ekaterinburg (formerly Sverdloosk) flight, forcing it to fly to Turkey where passengers and crew were released.  The hijacking was a protest by passengers, most of whom were Chechen Turks, against the Russian Government's treatment of Chechen.
FRANCE.  Two bombs caused minor damage to a U.S. newspaper and post office in Paris.  Gracchus-Baboeuf claimed responsibility in reprisal for U.S. involvement in the Gulf War.
JAPAN.  An arson attack targeting a car and motorcycle took place at a U.S. naval base outside of Tokyo.  A radical group was suspected.
EL SALVADOR.  The FMLN shot down a Honduran military helicopter which had entered Salvadoran territory due to bad weather conditions.  All nine crew members were killed.
HUNGARY.  Six people were injured when a powerful bomb exploded in the path of a bus carrying Soviet Jewish emigrants to the Budapest airport for a flight to Israel.  The bomb had been hidden in a car parked by an access road to the airport and detonated by remote control as the bus and escorting police car were passing.  The Movement for the Freedom of Jerusalem (MFJ) claimed responsibility in Beirut.
CUBA.  Three Cuban exiles were arrested when they attempted a clandestine landing north of Havana.  The men, who claim to be part of the anti-Castro group Commando L (Liberation), were armed with explosives and admitted in court that they were on a mission to create panic among the civilian population by attacking targets such as motion pictures and restaurants.
JAPAN.  A homemade bomb was discovered in a corridor of the eighth floor of the compound housing the U.S. Embassy staff and their families in Tokyo. The incident occurred as U.S. President George Bush visited the country.
PERU.  Sendero Luminoso shot down a helicopter carrying three U.S. nationals in the Upper Huallaga Valley.  All three were killed.
GERMANY.  A bomb exploded at a medical clinic in Bavaria, injuring a Croatian doctor involved in aid programs for secessionist Yugoslav republic of Croatia.  Serbian extremists were suspected.
ALGERIA.  Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) terrorists threw firebombs at the U.S. Embassy and Justice Ministry in Algiers.
PERU.  The U.S. ambassador's residence was attacked in Lima.  Three guards were killed and 15 meters of the embassy's retaining wall were destroyed by the car bomb.
VENEZUELA.  A bomb was defused at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce in Caracas.  Leftists were suspected.
TURKEY.  The regional security officer at the Israeli Embassy in Ankara was killed by a car bomb.  The Islamic Revenge Organization (IRO) claimed responsibility in protest against Israel's February 16 assassination of Hezbollah secretary-general Sheikh Abbas Mousawi in south Lebanon.
PERU.  Suspected MRTA guerrillas launched an incendiary attack against the Peruvian-Japanese Cultural Association in Lima.
ISRAEL.  A sword-brandishing Palestinian went on a rampage in Jaffa (part of Tel Aviv municipality) killing two people and wounding 19 others before being shot to death himself.
PANAMA.  The M-20 group claimed responsibility for the abduction of an official of Citizen Latinamerica Corporation, a subsidiary of the Japanese watchmaking firm.  $750,000 was reportedly paid by the firm, but the payment did not result in his release.
FRANCE.  The Turkish consulate in Strasbourg was firebombed.  About 20 attackers tried to enter the building but only succeeded in causing external damage.  No one was injured.
IRAN.  A group calling itself Shahin (Falcon) claimed responsibility for a bomb that went off in front of the Turkish Embassy in Tabriz.  The group said the explosion was in protest to the Turkish Government's treatment of Iraqi Kurds and against the Turkish air base which was at the disposal of U.S. forces.
RUSSIA.  A bus in the town of Lermontov was commandeered by hijackers armed with submachine guns and grenades to the airport at Mineralnye Vody, south of Moscow, where the group demanded a flight to Iraq.  The three hijackers released their hostages after winning freedom for two imprisoned burglars and safe passage to a separatist region.
COLOMBIA.  Foreign tourists were kidnapped in Antioquia, possibly by FARC guerrillas.  The victims were killed.
UNITED KINGDOM.  A British soldier was killed while walking to his army recruiting office in Derby.  The victim was shot in the head at point blank range.  The Irish National Liberation Army (INLA) claimed responsibility.
GERMANY.  Incendiary attacks occurred against Turkish banks in Hanover, Frankfurt and Ulm.  Letters left at the scene claimed that the attacks were in retaliation for the April 16 attack against Dev Sol members in Istanbul.
UNITED KINGDOM.  A bomb was defused at a McDonald's in Newport, So. England.  Animal rights extremists were suspected.
ISRAEL.  The Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine detonated a bomb at a bus station which resulted in casualties.
RUSSIA.  Suspected Palestinian terrorists bombed a Moskovski railroad station in St. Petersburg, killing one and injuring nine others.
PAKISTAN.  A high-ranking Indian diplomat was abducted in Islamabad by people he later accused of being Pakistani intelligence operatives.  After being tortured for seven hours, the victim was released.
PHILIPPINES.  A retired U.S. Air Force technical sergeant was assassinated in Mabalacat, Pampanga by NPA guerrillas.
FRANCE.  Two gunmen using silencers assassinated senior PLO intelligence officer Atef Bseiso outside a Left Bank Paris hotel where he'd been staying.  The PLO immediately blamed the Mossad for the murder.  Both Abu Nidal and the radical Jewish Kach movement claimed responsibility, but the Kach claim has not been taken seriously.
PANAMA.  Three gunmen using AK-47 assault rifles ambushed a U.S. military jeep in Chilibre, north of Panama City.  One soldier was killed, another seriously wounded.  The M-20 was suspected.
PAKISTAN.  A Japanese UN employee involved in providing humanitarian and economic aid to Afghan refugees was assassinated outside of his home in Peshawar.  Authorities suspect Afghan fundamentalists.
PHILIPPINES.  40 NPA guerrillas wearing army uniforms raided the U.S.-owned Franklin Baker company.  During the attack the Filipino deputy manager was abducted.  The victim was freed June 27.
CAMBODIA.  A Russian helicopter flying a U.N. mission near the Thai border came under ground fire.  There have been reports that rewards of up to $3,500 have been offered by Khmer Rouge guerrillas for attacks on U.N. peacekeeping forces.
KUWAIT.  British caterer Paul Stephen Ride was reported kidnapped.
ANGOLA. The Front for the Liberation of the Cabindan State-Renovada (Renewal)(FLEC-R) kidnapped three Portuguese construction company employees in Belize (Cabinda).  The three were freed on July 14 in Zaire.
ESTONIA.  A man threw a petrol bomb at the Russian Embassy.
ITALY.  ETA bombed the Spanish Chamber of Commerce in Milan.
KUWAIT.  Four Indian Shia Moslems were shot in the legs by unidentified gunmen in Kuwait City.
CHILE.  The Lautaro Youth Movement claimed responsibility for the bombing of a Mormon chapel in Paipote, Santiago.
PERU.  A Sendero Luminoso car bomb seriously damaged the Bolivian Embassy in Lima.  Six people were injured.
CHILE.  The Lautaro group bombed a Mormon church in La Araucania.
ISRAEL.  A Palestinian stabbed two policemen outside the walled city of Jerusalem, killing one and injuring the other.  The assailant was then shot by a tour operator who was passing by.
VENEZUELA.  Four policemen returning to their base in Apure state were killed by a powerful ELN car bomb.
HUNGARY.  20 skinheads in Budapest attacked the cultural secretary of the Yemeni Embassy.  Once they realized the victim's status, the group left him alone.
PERU.  MRTA guerrillas overtook the offices of UPI in Lima and forced the transmission of a statement against President Fujimori.  When the terrorists left they left behind a timed-explosive device which police were able to deactivate in time.
GERMANY.  Kurds attacked Turkish banks in Frankfurt and Darmstadt.
FRANCE.  Members of the Union of Young Kurdish Revolutionaries threw petrol bombs at the Turkish consulate in Marseille.
ALGERIA.  A bomb was discovered at the Swiss national airlines office in Algiers following a telephoned warning. Authorities speculate that these attacks in Algiers may have been a Hezbollah operation carried out locally by the FIS.
SOMALIA.  Somali gunmen ambushed a UN jeep in Mogadishu, injuring two UN military observers.
TURKEY.  Members of Dev Sol set fire to an oil storage tank near Diyarbakir which was owned by a subsidiary of Royal Dutch Shell.
GERMANY.  A neo-Nazi threw a Molotov cocktail into an immigrant hostel near Berlin, forcing the evacuation of the 44 inhabitants.
GERMANY.  Molotov cocktails were thrown into an immigrant shelter in Hemsbach, injuring two young children.
ISRAEL.  A police officer was shot and killed by a member of Hamas in Jerusalem.
TURKEY.  A bomb was defused at the Japanese-Turkish automobile company Toyota-S.A.
SUDAN.  A Burmese UN aid worker and a Norwegian journalist were killed by the Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA).  The guerrillas claim the victims were killed accidentally when caught in crossfire.  The UN shut down its relief efforts and evacuated personnel.
PERU.  An Italian missionary aid worker was killed by Sendero.
CHILE.  Between October 7 and 13 there were six attacks against Mormon churches in Santiago and Talca.Note:  Range of dates.
CHILE.  Between October 7 and 13 there were six attacks against Mormon churches in Santiago and Talca.Note: range of dates
PERU.  The MRTA fired three rockets into the U.S. Ambassador's residence in Lima.
NICARAGUA.  An explosive device went off by the U.S. Embassy in Managua.
GERMANY.  Petrol bombs were thrown at a Turkish travel agency, a Turkish bank and a cultural center in Hanover.  Kurdish protesters suspected.
IRAN.  The Iraq-based Mujahideen-i-Khalq (MK) claimed credit for a bomb that went off at the Tehran office of the Revolutionary Guards commander Major General Muhsin Rezai.  Although the building was destroyed, there were no casualties.
EGYPT.  El Gama'a el-Islamiya claimed credit for a machinegun attack on a tour bus.  One British female was killed and two men injured in the attack.
ISRAEL.  Israeli customs warehouses were set fire to in East Jerusalem. The Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine claimed responsibility.
ANGOLA.  UNITA opened fire on the International Airport in Luanda.
KUWAIT.  Iraqi troops were thwarted in their attempt to kidnap American contract employee William Smith near the border.  The victim was employed with the same company as Chad Hall, kidnapped in October.
COLOMBIA.  CGSB guerrillas attacked a jointly owned Colombian-Japanese copper mine.  All equipment was destroyed.
ARGENTINA.  A bomb exploded at an ATM outside a Bank of Boston branch in Buenos Aires.  The People's Revolutionary Organization claimed responsibility.
TURKEY.  A firebomb planted at the Russian Consulate was disarmed.  The PKK claimed responsibility for the bomb.
CAMBODIA.  Two UN vehicles hit landmines in separate incidents, injuring five UN civil policemen.
ITALY.  A Somali refugee was set afire as he slept in a crude shelter.  The victim was not seriously injured.
CHILE.  The Manuel Rodriguez Patriotic Front set off a bomb at an unoccupied Mormon church in Santiago's Renca district.
PERU.  Sendero Luminoso detonated a car bomb in front of the Costa Rican embassy in Lima.
TURKEY.  Iranian Abbas Golizade was kidnapped in Istanbul.  The victim, an Iranian opposition activist, was reportedly a bodyguard of the former Shah.
RWANDA.  Seven people were injured when a bomb exploded in a bathroom of a Belgian-owned hotel in Butare.
SOMALIA.  An unknown assailant in Mogadishu escaped after attempting to shoot a UN officer in the face.  The pistol misfired.
CZECH/SLOVAKIA BORDER.  A customs shed in Stary Hrozenkov, at the newly created border of the Czech Republic and Slovakia, was the target of a bomb attack.  Unknown bombers scrawled Up yours, Meciar, referring to the Slovak prime minister who provided the impetus for the split up of Czechoslovakia.
ISRAEL.  Four Israelis were stabbed by a Palestinian from the Gaza Strip in an attack at Tel Aviv's central bus station.  The attacker was shot and killed by a civilian.  The attack was claimed by the Islamic Jihad Palestine (IJP).
CAMBODIA.  Khmer Rouge guerillas kidnapped four UNTAC peacekeepers, including two Britons, in the Kompong Chnnang province.  They were released unharmed two days later.
PERU.  A car bomb, with 300 kg of dynamite and ammonium nitrate fuel oil, exploded near the Coca-Cola bottling plant in Lima, killing a guard from Lima Electric Power Enterprise, and injuring four others.  The guard at the Coca-Cola plant was shot to death by the terrorists before they left the van containing the bomb.  The plant and other nearby factories suffered extensive damage.  The Shining Path claimed credit.
SOMALIA.  Five UN Belgian soldiers and five police officers were injured when a grenade exploded outside police headquarters in Kismayu.
UNITED STATES.  A gunman approached cars at the entrance of the CIA Virginia headquarters shortly before 8AM and randomly fired into several cars with an AK-47 rifle.  Two CIA employees were killed and three others were wounded in the attack.  The gunman escaped in a nearby car. The suspect in the shooting is 28-year-old Pakistani national Mir Amal Kansi   of Reston, VA.  A possible connection to a 1984 assassination of a Pakistani politician in Quetta is being investigated.  The suspect, believed to be a member of a prominent family of the Baluchi tribe in southwestern Pakistan bordering Iran, entered the US illegally in 1991 and applied for political asylum.ADDENDUM.  With the secret help of Afghan citizens and the suspect's native Pakistan, Mir Amal Kansi (referred to himself as Kasi) was located. On 17 June 1997, he confessed to the crime during the long flight aboard military aircraft from a base in Pakistan to Dulles airport, USA. If convicted, he faces the death penalty.  He was convicted in 1997 and sentenced to death on one count and life on another count.  He was executed on November 15, 2002.
COLOMBIA.  A pipeline belonging to the Texas Company was bombed by rebels near Rio Opon, San Vicente de Chucuri Jurisdiction.  About 3000 barrels of oil were spilled.
AFGHANISTAN.  A UN convoy was attacked in eastern Afghanistan.  Six people were killed - four UN workers and two Afghan drivers.  No one claimed responsibility for the attack.
EGYPT.  A bus carrying 36 German tourists from Cairo to Luxor was fired upon from across the Al-Ibrahimiya canal near the town of Dayrut while under police escort.  There were no casualties.
SOMALIA.  An Irish nurse with the charity Concern was shot and killed by gunmen near the bandit-plagued town of Afgoi.  She was driving in a three-car convoy to Baidoa when fired upon.
UNITED STATES.  The World Trade Center in Manhattan suffered a bomb explosion in the parking garage that killed 6 and injured 1042. The noon-time blast caused serious damage as well.  Six days after the bombing, police arrested Mohammed Salameh as he was trying to get the deposit back for the van he rented to use as a car bomb.  He is a member of the mosque in Jersey City led by Sheik Omar Abdul Rahman, a radical Egyptian cleric.  Also arrested was Ibrahim Elgabrowny, a cousin of El Sayyid Nosair, Kahane's assassin; Nidal Ayyad; Mahmud Abouhalima, probably the mastermind; Bilal Alkaisi; Ramzi Ahmed Yousef; and Mohammed Ahmed Ajaj.  A group calling itself the Liberation Army Fifth Battalion claimed responsibility for the bombing in a letter sent to the New York Times.  They call for an end to US relations with Israel and an end to US interfering in Middle Eastern affairs.  Ramzi Ahmed Yousef,  accused of being the mastermind behind the bombing, was arrested in Pakistan and brought back to the US.ADDINFO:  Ramzi Ahmed Yousef was sentenced to life plus 240 years in prison on 8 January 1998.  He was also fined $4.5 million plus more for restitution.  He stated I am a terrorist and I am proud of it  when the sentence was handed down in court.  The sentence applied to both the World Trade Center and the plan to carry out bombings on 11 or 12  aircraft.Four other suspects were convicted on March 4, 1994 on the 38 counts against them.  They were sentenced to 240 years plus large fines on May 25, 1994.The sixth suspect was convicted in Nov 1997 and sentenced in April 1998 to 240 years plus a fine of $10 million.
ISRAEL.  An Israeli security guard was stabbed by a West Bank Palestinian woman in East Jerusalem while guarding the seminary of the Jewish extremist Ateret Cohenim organisation.
LEBANON.   PFLP-GC kidnapped then executed an Israeli soldier.  This was in retaliation for not allowing Palestinian deportees to return to the West Bank and Gaza.
LEBANON.  Dynamite was thrown at the Kuwaiti Embassy in Beirut.  No injuries were reported.  Two groups claimed responsibility: a previously unknown group calling itself Revolutionary Outburst Movement (Harakat al-Intilaqah al-Thawriyah); and another unknown group called the Arab Revolutionary Resurgence Movement (harakat al-madd al-thawri al-arabi). A handwritten statement said the attack was a warning to Zionist and American enemies along with treacherous Arab regimes and an expression of their determination.
ISRAEL.   A Palestinian was stabbed while visiting with a Jewish American.
IRAQ.  A Handicap International vehicle was attacked by gunfire from another vehicle on the road near Sulamaniya.  A Belgian aid worker was killed.
INDIA.  An Indian Airlines plane was hijacked shortly after takeoff from New Delhi by a Hindu man pretending to have explosives strapped to his body.  He ordered the pilot to fly to Pakistan where it was denied permission to land.  The plane then flew to Amritsar and landed there. He released all the passengers unharmed and surrendered himself after five hours of negotiation.   He was protesting the Hindu-Muslim violence in India.
PHILIPPINES.  A road construction project by a US company was raided by suspected Moro Islamic Liberation Front guerrillas who destroyed equipment but caused no injuries.  Local officials say the rebels were angry that they were not consulted about the road.
EGYPT.  Five gasoline bombs were found on a tour bus carrying 50 German tourists in Cairo.  They were removed without incident.
CAMBODIA.  A UN armored personnel carrier was hit by a Khmer Rouge anti-tank grenade killing a Bulgarian soldier in New Oral in the Kompong Speu province.  Five others were injured.
ANGOLA.  UNITA rebel forces shot down a UN plane carrying food to Luena. The Russian pilot was killed by a mine when the plane crashed.
FRANCE/SPAIN.  The Basque separatist group Iparretarrak bombed a natural gas pipeline that was under construction in the Pyrenees.  It caused little damage.
CAMBODIA.  Three Japanese UN soldiers were killed when their convoy was ambushed by NADK or  Khmer Rouge members.  Another Japanese soldier and five Dutch soldiers were wounded.
CHILE.  A Mormon Church in Santiago was burned down in an arson attack by two men and a woman of the MAPU Lautaro group.
CAMBODIA.  Two Chinese soldiers with the UN forces were killed in an attack in Kompong Cham province by NADK members.
COLOMBIA.  The Popular Liberation Army kidnapped and murdered a Spanish priest in San Jacinto.
PERU.  Two Japanese-Peruvian owned businesses in Lima were bombed by Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement terrorists.  The attacks followed a visit to Japan by President Alberto Fujimori.
CAMBODIA.  A British volunteer with the Halo Trust, which conducts mine-clearing operations, was kidnapped along with his driver and interpreter by Khmer Rouge guerrillas near Pursat.  The 16 Cambodian mineclearers that accompanied them were released.
PAKISTAN.  Two Chinese hydrologists were kidnapped by Afghani Mullah Abdul Salam Rocketi in western Pakistan.  Salam is demanding the return of three Stinger missiles that were seized by Pakistani authorities, 6 million rupees and the release of his brother imprisoned in Pakistan on gun-running charges.  He has taken the captives to Afghanistan.  The two Chinese hostages were released along with eight Pakistanis on 22 July 1994 after negotiations by Pakistani and Saudi officials.
GERMANY.  Six Turkish offices in Munich were damaged in attacks by PKK members.  A Turkish bank and a Turkish private airline company were among the victims.
GERMANY.  The Turkish consulate in Karlsruhe in southern Germany was blockaded by Kurds.  The Kurds were then attacked by a group of Turks.  Six people were injured in the skirmish and 100 were arrested.
SWITZERLAND.  The Turkish Consulate in Geneva was attacked by PKK members.
FRANCE.   At least six different Turkish targets in Paris have been attacked.  Kurdish separatists are suspected.
FRANCE.  Suspected Kurdish militants attacked the offices of Turkish Airlines in Lyon.
DENMARK.  Turkish airline and tourism offices in Copenhagen were attacked by PKK guerrillas.
LEBANON.  Hezbollah members exploded a bomb on the roadside as an IDF patrol passed by. There were no injuries.
SOMALIA.  Italian UN peacekeeping troops were ambushed after searching a suspected weapons storehouse in Mogadishu by Aidid supporters.  Three soldiers were killed and 22 were injured, as well as four Somali policemen.
TURKEY.  Two cousins, one British and the other Australian, were kidnapped by PKK guerrillas while they were touring southeastern Turkey on bicycles. They were released on August 10, 1993 near Guroymak.
LEBANON.  The PFLP-GC detonated a bomb under an Israeli convoy in southern Lebanon near Jarmaq, killing two soldiers and wounding three others.
TURKEY.   A small bomb hidden in a trash can near an ATM, exploded near the Haya Sophia Cathedral Museum in Istanbul.  Three tourists and one local were injured.   Kurdish militants suspected.
VENEZUELA.  A bomb exploded just outside of the Colombian Embassy in Caracas.  There were no injuries.
ISRAEL.  An IDF soldier was kidnapped and murdered north of Jerusalem by Hamas members who were driving a van with whom the soldier had caught a ride.  The body of the soldier was later found in the burnt out van. Hamas released a leaflet claiming responsibility and detailing the murder.
COLOMBIA.  Four unidentified gunmen took the Costa Rican Ambassador to Colombia hostage for an hour outside Bogota. He was released unharmed.
TUNISIA.  A KLM flight from Tunis to Amsterdam was hijacked by an Egyptian claiming to have a bomb and demanding the release of Omar Abel-Rahman and to be taken to New York.  The hijacker was seized after 10.5 hours by German police at the Dusseldorf airport who raided the plane and captured the hijacker.  He had held two crewmen hostage.  No one was injured in the incident.
TURKEY.  Four ethnic Turks from Afghanistan were kidnapped from a bus at a PKK roadblock in Batman province.
TURKEY.  A gunman, speaking Farsi, shot to death an Iranian dissident living in Turkey at the victim's home in Ankara.
SWEDEN.  A right-wing Swede shot at foreign immigrants with a laser sighted gun.   He is on trial for the shootings.   He is called the Laserman.
COLOMBIA.  A German agronomist was kidnapped by FARC members from a ranch near Bogota.  He escaped on October 16.
CHILE.  The MIR claimed the bombings at two McDonald's restaurants in Santiago.  They also threatened to bomb other US stores to protest US imperialism.
LEBANON.  The al-Huqban Operation Martyrs Group of the Islamic Resistance claimed the bombing of an Israeli army patrol in Shihin to continue the sacred policy of jihad... The patrol members were either killed or injured.
GERMANY.  A German transport plane was hijacked to Turkey, probably Izmir.
SOMALIA.  Rebels attacked the UN Pakistani forces, killing three and wounding seven.
SOMALIA.  Somali gunmen attempted to kidnap an Italian journalist they thought was American.
TANZANIA.  A group of four men, suspected to be Angolan rebels, occupied the Danish Embassy in Dar es Salaam from September 28 until their arrest on October 4.
JAPAN.   The Russian Embassy in Tokyo was attacked by two Japanese men.  They threw flares at the compound.  They were arrested  but did not give a reason for the attack.   There were no injuries or damage.
NORWAY.  Suspected agents of Iran, shot and seriously wounded a publisher with a firm that translated and published Rushdie's The Satanic Verses. The publisher was shot outside his home in Oslo.  Norwegian police closed the case in April 1995 not able to conclusively link the assassination to Iran.
ALGERIA.  Two Russian flight training officers were killed by three members of Unified Unit of Jihad.  Two others were injured in the incident.
EGYPT.  A gunman fired into the restaurant of the Semiramis Hotel in Cairo killing three people and injuring three others.  Two Americans and one Frenchman were killed.  Among the wounded was an American and an Italian and a Syrian.  The gunman was arrested.  Witnesses say he shouted Allah Akbar (God is Great) and condemned alcohol.  Upon arrest he denounced the killing of Moslems in Bosnia.  The Italian died of his wounds on Nov 17.
IRAN.  The French Embassy and a French airline office in Tehran was attacked to protest the visit by Iranian opposition leader Maryam Rajavi to France.
LEBANON.  A PLO Fatah official, Shabaytah, was assassinated in Sidon by suspected Fatah Revolutionary Council (Abu Nidal) members.
YEMEN.  Yemeni Jahm tribesmen, headed by Mubarak Mashan who is a former leader of a pro-Iraqi political group, kidnapped an American diplomat who heads the US Information Service in Sanaa.  They kidnapped him to gain negotiating leverage with the government to improve and develop their area.  He was released on 11/30/(93/94)(?) after the Yemeni government gave in to demands including payments for operating oil pumping stations (owned by Hunt Oil Co.) on the tribe's land.
YEMEN.  A German engineer was kidnapped by Yemeni tribesmen.  He was released on Dec 8, 1993.
ALGERIA.  A Russian wife of an Algerian was shot and killed in Algiers by the GIA. This was after the Muslim extremists' Nov 30 deadline for all foreigners to leave the country.
OCCUPIED TERRITORIES.  A member of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) shot and killed a Jewish settler at Rachel's Tomb, near Bethlehem.
SOMALIA.  Recently arrived Indian soldiers at a UN post in Bilis Qooqaani in southern Somalia were attacked with antitank rockets, mortar bombs, and machine guns.
EGYPT.  A bus carrying Austrian tourist was attacked with an explosive device which was thrown at the bus.  Then the attackers opened fire on pursuers. el-Gama'a el-Islamiya claimed responsibility for the attack which injured 16 people.
CAMBODIA.  Suspected Khmer Rouge gunmen attacked a train with employees of London-based Hazardous Areas Life Support Organization (HALO) Trust aboard with AK-47s.  Eleven Cambodian mine-clearers were injured.
BELGIUM.  The body of a former Bosnian general was found at a motorway rest stop.  It was reported that it appeared as if he had been executed.
GUATEMALA.  A leaflet bomb was thrown at the Mexican Consulate in Guatemala City causing considerable damage.  The leaflet was printed with banner headlines in support of the Chiapas revolt against the Mexican government, bearing the letterhead of the Peasant Unity Committee (CUP).A nearby Mexican restaurant was also targeted with a leaflet bomb.  The two bombs exploded a few seconds apart.
SOMALIA.  The British finance officer for the UN World Food Program was kidnapped in Mogadishu.  He was released by his Somali captors 42 hours later, on January 12.
COLOMBIA.  Two US missionaries were kidnapped by FARC in San Jose, near Villavicencio, to protest the presence of US Army Engineers in Columbia. A group of 20 FARC members carried out the kidnapping.  The missionaries were part of the New Tribes Mission (NTM).  The captors also demanded a ransom.  The bodies of the hostages were found on 19 June 1995 in Cundinamarca Province.  They had been shot.
YEMEN.  Four Hunt Oil employees were kidnapped by Yemeni tribesmen near Knowlon in eastern Yemen.  They were released after negotiations with the Yemeni government.
ALGERIA.  A Jewish Tunisian was killed in his Algiers shop by unknown assailants.
IRELAND.  A letter bomb was sent to the librarian at Trinity College in Dublin by Protestant extremists.  The package was intercepted by postal workers and defused by police.  It was sent in retaliation for an attack on the Linenhall Library in Belfast by the IRA.
COLOMBIA.  A Swiss child (Richard Staehelin) was kidnapped by FARC members in Santa Maria.  Authorities believe they are hiding him in the mountains of Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta.  The boy's father works at a Bogota pharmaceutical company.
PHILIPPINES.  The offices of three oil companies were bombed:  Petron, Shell and Caltex.  Two persons were injured.  The Alex Boncayao Brigade (ABB) claimed responsibility.  The attacks were carried out to protest increases in oil-related costs.
COLOMBIA.  A wave of bombings damaged several US-based businesses and schools.  Four Citibank branches, an English language school, a German language school, an American Express travel agency, and a stationery store were targeted.  The bombings were carried out by FARC to protest the presence of US Army Engineers in Colombia.
COLOMBIA.  A wave of bombings damaged several US-based businesses and schools.  Four Citibank branches, an English language school, a German language school, an American Express travel agency, and a stationery store were targeted.  The bombings were carried out by FARC to protest the presence of US Army Engineers in Colombia.
ITALY.  The car of the Spanish Embassy's Air Force attache was bombed in Rome.  One person was injured.
YEMEN.  Three Chinese road workers were kidnapped by Yemeni tribesmen who demanded that the death sentences imposed on fellow tribesmen are lifted and that the building of the Jihanah-Ma'rib road is stopped.  The three hostages were released on Feb 21, 1994.
ISRAEL.  A katyusha rocket was fired on the Galilee from Lebanon by a Palestinian group called 13 Black September.
ESTONIA.  Five masked men armed with hand guns forced their way onto a Russian air force base in Amari.  They threatened the Russian guards, demanding weapons, and then set fire to a guardhouse.  It was reported that the men spoke Russian with Estonian accents.
COLOMBIA.  Two bombs protesting the presence of US Army Engineers in Colombia, damaged a travel agency and a private security company in Medellin.
ITALY.  A member of the Iranian National Resistance Council was the target of an assassination attempt in Florence.  Two Iranians were arrested.
EGYPT.  Members of al-Jama'a al-Islamiya opened fire on the Misr-American Bank in Abu Tig in southern Egypt.
COLOMBIA.  Two bombs were found and defused in Mormon churches in Barranquilla and Manizales.  Responsibility was not claimed.
COLOMBIA.  A bomb was found and defused in a Mormon church in Chinchina.
UNITED STATES.  Gunmen attacked three prominent Haitian exiles in the Little Haiti area of Miami.  One of the men died at the scene, the others escaped uninjured.  Although the police and district attorney have insisted that the attackers' motive was not political, the Haitian community nonetheless believe that the Haitian military government is responsible.  They linked the attack to the murder of three Haitian exiles in Miami in 1991.
LEBANON.  A grenade was thrown into the British Embassy compound in Beirut.  There was no claim of responsibility.
AZERBAIJAN.  A large bomb exploded on a train in the Baku subway station. The bomb was planted under a seat in the first car and is thought to have been detonated by remote-control.  The government had recently cracked down on opposition groups.  Armenian agents are also suspected.
ALGERIA.  Two French men, a businessman and his son, were stabbed to death in their home in Algiers.  The Algerian Armed Islamic Group (GIA) claimed responsibility for the assassinations and said the killings were part of its campaign to rid Algeria of Jews and Christians.  Their deaths bring the total number of foreigners killed in Algeria in the last six months to 32
JORDAN.  A bomb was found and defused at the Forte Grand Hotel (British-owned) in Amman.
TURKEY.  A bomb exploded at the St.  Sophia religious shrine and tourist attraction in Istanbul, injuring three European tourists - from Germany, Spain and the Netherlands.  The Kurdish Workers' Party claimed responsibility for the bombing as part of its campaign to ruin Turkey's tourist industry.
SOMALIA.  Two Indian UN peacekeepers were shot dead by Somali gunmen while they were escorting aid workers.
TURKEY.  A bomb exploded in the Covered Bazaar in Istanbul.  Two people died, one Spanish and one Tunisian, and twelve were wounded including several foreigners - a Tunisian, two French, and a Lebanese and also Spanish and Belgian tourists.  This incident is part of a PKK campaign to dissuade tourists from travelling to Turkey.
IRAQ.  A Danish UN soldier was shot in an ambush on a road in Kurdish-controlled northern Iraq.  He was guarding a food shipment.
ISRAEL.  Gunmen opened fire on commuters standing at a bus stop in Ashod killing one and injuring four others.  Both Hamas and Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility.
GREECE.  A time bomb was placed in the office of Dutch insurance company, National Nederlande, in Athens. 17 November claimed responsibility.
BOSNIA.  A Dutch military observer disappeared, presumed kidnapped, when he tried to cross into a Serb-held area.
SOMALIA.  The Sudanese Ambassador to Somalia was kidnapped by Somali gunmen belonging to the Hawadle clan.  He was released eight days later.
GREECE.  A bomb exploded in the United Nations High Commission offices in Kolonaki early in the morning.  The building was extensively damaged.
SOUTH AFRICA.  A black American journalist covering a neo-Nazi Afrikaner Resistance Movement (AWB) rally was attacked and beaten by AWB members. The attackers told the journalist to write to Mandela and de Klerk and explain the Afrikanners would not be turned out of our land.
ALGERIA.  Two French citizens, one a priest and the other a church worker, who jointly owned a bookstore in Algiers were killed by gunmen in their shop.  The GIA claimed responsibility for the killings.  The killings occurred as 20,000 people demonstrated on the other side of town in support of establishing a dialogue between the Algerian government and Islamic extremists.
MEXICO.  A section of railroad tracks in Chiapas State was destroyed by a bomb.  The Army arrested four Salvadorans, seven Guatemalans and one Honduran near the site.
CAMBODIA.  A grenade was thrown into the Malaysian Embassy in Phenom Phen. It is suspected that the attack was in protest of foreign military aid being provided to Cambodia.  The Khmer Rouge is suspected.
IRELAND.  Two men burst into a Dublin pub during a fundraising for imprisoned IRA members and opened fire on the patrons before leaving a bomb and fleeing.  The 18-lb bomb did not explode.  The Ulster Volunteer Force claimed responsibility.  It was the first attempted bombing in Dublin since the 1970s.
RWANDA.  A mortar round killed a Senegalese UN soldier in Kigali.  The Rebel Rwanda Patriotic Front was responsible.
LEBANON.  A German historian narrowly escaped being kidnapped in the Bekah Valley.  Passersby intervened to help her flee from two men who had identified themselves as Hezbollah members.
PERU.  A Mormon church in Chilca was bombed by Sendero Luminoso.
TURKEY.  Two bombs exploded in Fethiye, 60 miles from Marmaris, wounding 10 tourists.  An Austrian, two Germans, three Britons and four Turks were among those injured.  The Kurdish Patriotic Union claimed responsibility after another bombing the next day.
TURKEY.  A bomb planted in a McDonald's restaurant in Istanbul was discovered, but exploded while being defused.
UNITED KINGDOM.  Police arrested a man with a bomb concealed in a bag at a bus stop in London.  The bomb consisted of 2.5 kg of Semtex and gasoline. Police believe the man was on his way to plant the bomb in London's financial center and that together with an accomplice was about to implement plans on a new bombing campaign in London.  Explosives for six more bombs were subsequently discovered.  The bomber was sentenced to 25 years in prison, his accomplice received a 20 year sentence.
GREECE.  The Turkish Deputy Chief of Mission in Athens was killed by November 17 members who drove up alongside his car and shot the diplomat as he was on his way to work.
GREECE.  A bomb planted in a trash can exploded outside a restaurant in Lindhos beach, on the island of Rodhos, injuring an Italian tourist and a Greek citizen.  No warning was given.  Although no group claimed responsibility it is widely assumed that the perpetrator's intention was to harm the Greek tourist industry.
ALGERIA.  Three Islamic fundamentalists attacked a police car at the gates of the Italian Embassy in Algiers.  Two policemen were killed and a third injured.  Two of the attackers were also killed in the shootout.  Although the police were not guarding the embassy it is suspected that the attack was somehow linked to the murder of seven Italian seamen [7 July 1994].
ANGOLA.  An aircraft chartered by World Food Program was hit by some kind of projectile fired at it while landing at Malange.  A hole at the rear of the aircraft was found.  The flight had been cleared by the government of Angola and the UNITA rebels.
FRANCE.  Eight North African men were injured by shotgun blasts fired from a passing car.  The attack was racially motivated.  The police killed one attacker during the pursuit that followed the incident and arrested two others.  They were all European Frenchmen.
PAKISTAN.  Two Chinese engineers working at the Guddu Thermal power plant were kidnapped in Kasur.  They were seized in the midst of intense pressure on the Afghan leader Mullah Rocketi by Pakistan to release various hostages he has held for over one year, among them other Chinese engineers.
ISRAEL.  A bomb was found aboard a train travelling from Nahariyya to Tel Aviv.
TURKEY.  A bomb planted on the fuel pipeline leading to the joint US/Turkish air base in Incirlik was defused just before it was to explode.
COLOMBIA.  Two Mormon churches in Cali were bombed.  The bombs each contained a half kilo of dynamite placed in a can.  Two people near one of the churches were injured.  FARC claimed credit for the bombing in statements left at the sites protesting US intervention in Haiti.
GERMANY.  A Turkish-owned building housing a mosque and cultural center was destroyed in a firebomb attack in Sindelfingen.
BURUNDI.  The home of an UNHCR official was attacked in the town of Kirundo.  Both the official and one of the soldiers guarding him were killed.  Five other persons were wounded.
ITALY.  Three men slashed the face of a Norwegian Jewish woman living in Assisi in an apparent anti-Semitic attack.
MOROCCO.  Three French Muslim gunmen opened fire in the lobby of the Atlas Asni Hotel in Marrakech killing two people (both Spaniards) and injuring two others (of whom one was also Spanish).  The gunmen also robbed the hotel of 10,000 dirhams and fled with a hostage who they later released. One man, Boujedli, was arrested on 16 Oct 1994 in the northern part of Morocco and was found to be a member of a terrorist group called de Fes. The shootings and robbery had been ordered by Islamic extremists seeking to destabilize the Moroccan economy.  In January 1997 a number of members of the group who organized the series of attacks were given sentences of between one and eight years imprisonment.
ZAIRE.  The house of foreign aid workers for CARE on Lake Kivu was attacked by unknown assailants.  Stones were thrown and a shot was fired at the house.  Zairean troops were alerted and the attackers fled.  There were no arrests.
BOSNIA.  Bosnian Serbs, protesting Pope John Paul II proposed visit to Sarajevo, fired 11 mortar rounds into a field near the intended location of the open-air Mass.
CHILE.  Two Mormon churches in Santiago were the targets of bomb attacks.
GERMANY.  A housing complex in Erbendorf where 22 Turkish families live was attacked by unknown assailants with Molotov cocktails causing only minor damage.
ALGERIA.  A Bosnian national was killed by suspected Muslim fundamentalists in north-east Algiers.
BOLIVIA.  Dynamite was thrown into a Mormon church in La Paz causing some damage but no injuries.
ALGERIA.  The 12 year old sister-in-law of the Second Secretary to the Malian Embassy in Algiers was stabbed to death when attackers forced their way into the diplomat's residence.  The diplomat and his wife were not home at the time of the attack.
ALGERIA.  Suspected Islamic extremists shot and killed a South Korean businessman, employed by Daewoo, near his home in Algiers.  He was involved in the project to build a Hilton Hotel in Algiers which the Islamic fundamentalists oppose.  He was the 64th foreigner killed in the 13 months since Islamic extremists launched their campaign against foreigners living in Algiers.
ALGERIA.  Two European employees of Schlumberger working at an Algerian oil site were killed by about 30 GIA gunmen who forced their way into the camp.  The two Europeans, a Frenchman and an Italian, were the only persons singled out to be killed.
NETHERLANDS.  A bomb exploded in the center of The Hague.  Seven people were injured.  The explosion occurred 300 meters from the Israeli Embassy.
EGYPT.  A British tourist was killed in a machine gun attack on a tour bus by suspected Islamic extremists.  Three other British tourists were injured as well as the Egyptian driver.  The attack occurred in Naqada, near Luxor, 300 miles south of Cairo.  The al'Jama'a al-Islamiya is suspected.
NORWAY.  A SAS flight was hijacked over northern Norway by a Bosnian refugee to draw attention to the situation in his country and convince the international community to provide aid.  The plane landed at Oslo's Gardermoen Airport, where the hijacker surrendered after negotiations.
SIERRA LEONE.  Rebels kidnapped two British men who worked with Voluntary Service Overseas on road projects in Kabala.  In January 1995, the rebels holding the two men threatened to execute them if a death sentence imposed on an army officer charged with aiding the rebels was carried out.  The two Britons were released on 21 April 1995.
ISRAEL.  A firebomb was thrown at an Israeli car near the neighborhood of al-Ayzariyah in East Jerusalem, injuring two people.
ANGOLA.  Three Polish men working for an Italian company in Angola were kidnapped by FLEC (Front for the Liberation of the Cabinda Enclave).  They were released on 29 Dec 1994.
SIERRA LEONE.  A Russian was kidnapped by rebels.
PHILIPPINES.  A bomb exploded on a Philippines Airlines flight en route from Manila to Tokyo with 292 people on board.  One passenger was killed an 10 others injured.  The victims were all Japanese.  The plane landed in Okinawa with a huge hole in the floor.  The Abu Sayyaf group, an Islamic fundamentalist organization, claimed credit for the bombing.  Police doubt, however, that the claim is true.  On 31 March 1995, Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, (the alleged mastermind of the February 1993 World Trade Center bombing in New York City) who had a flat in Manila where bomb-making materials were found as well as a computer disk detailing the plans for the bombing, was charged with murder, attempted murder, and acts inimical to civil aviation in connection with this bombing.
FRANCE.  A small bomb exploded outside of the Italian consulate in Marseille.  A group opposed to Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi and his forthcoming visit to France, claimed responsibility.
TURKEY.  A car bomb exploded in front of the Hilton Hotel in Izmir.  A second bomb found in the car was defused.  No one has claimed responsibility.
EGYPT.  Two Argentinians and four Egyptians were injured when suspected al-Gama'a al-Islamiya gunmen opened-fire on the train travelling from Luxor to Cairo.  The attack occurred at al-Ashiyah, Markaz Qus, Qena Governorate.
COLOMBIA.  An American engineer with Correjon Coal Mine in La Guajira was kidnapped by a large group of armed men who stopped his car on a road in Hatonuevo.  It is suspected that a splinter group of the now defunct EPL (Popular Liberation Army) is responsible.  He was released in April 1995.
ISRAEL.  A crowded bus stop at Beit Lid, near Netanya, frequented by soldiers was the target of two suicide bombers.  The bombs exploded within a few minutes of each other, causing further injuries as people rushed in to help the injured from the first explosion.  The Islamic Jihad Movement in Palestine claims that two of its members from Gaza were the suicide bombers.  The bombers disguised themselves in Israeli soldier uniforms.  In August 2005, Sami Al-Arian and three other individuals were put on trial and accused of raising money and supporting the Palestinian Islamic Jihad in this attack.  All four defendants deny any involvement.
SIERRA LEONE.  The British-based charity organization, Actionaid was attacked by rebels in Kambia.  Six of their staff were kidnapped but released soon after.  Actionaid suspended operations in Sierra Leone after this attack.
COLOMBIA.  Two Brazilian engineers working for Swiss-owned ASEA were kidnapped.
SUDAN.  Unidentified Sudanese gunmen kidnapped eleven aid workers in the Upper Nile Province, releasing all but five foreigners.  Of the foreign hostages, three were with the UN Operation Lifeline Sudan and one each with Swiss Disaster Relief and Medecins de Monde.  They are being held by a rebel commander named Gordon Koang Banypint.
TAJIKISTAN.  An anti-tank grenade was launched against a Russian border guard bus transporting Russian hospital workers.  The attack, which occurred three days before the general election, left one person dead and six others injured.  No one claimed responsibility.  Islamic Tajik rebels are suspected.  Two Tajiks were arrested in Kazakhstan in May 1995 for the attack.
GERMANY.  Two Turkish travel agencies in Berlin were attacked with firebombs.  A note was found referring to the Kurdish struggle for independence.  Damage to the two agencies was minimal as one firebomb failed to ignite and the other spread only to a limited area. Continued through the 26th.
SPAIN.  A bomb exploded outside a branch of the French bank Credit Lyonnais in Bilbao.  An anonymous caller informed the local traffic service about the bomb after it had already exploded.  There were no casualties but damage was caused to the bank, an adjacent bingo hall and eight parked cars.  No claim of responsibility was made, but ETA, who have attacked French targets in the region in the past, are suspected.
ETHIOPIA.  Two grenades were thrown at the USAID offices in Addis Ababa. There were no injuries.
DENMARK.  A group of divers emerging from the sea allegedly opened fire on a Danish policeman near Copenhagen airport.  The incident occurred close to the site of the United Nations Summit for Social Development, which was attended by Hillary Clinton.
GERMANY.  A Turkish home was firebombed in Buende by suspected Kurdish extremists.  There were no injuries.
GERMANY.  A Turkish travel agency in Frankfurt was firebombed by suspected Kurdish extremists.  There were no injuries.
GERMANY.  Attacks against Turkish targets in three other German cities caused property damage but no injuries.  Kurdish extremists are suspected.
GERMANY.  A Turkish social club in Dueren was firebombed by suspected Kurdish extremists.  There were no injuries.
GERMANY.  A Turkish social club in Gengenbach was firebombed by suspected Kurdish extremists.  There were no injuries.
CHAD.  An American employee of the UN Development Program along with a Malian, and two Chadian guards were kidnapped by the Chadian opposition group, Movement for Democracy and Development (MDD), in Mao.  The rebels claimed they had carried out the kidnappings to prove that the security situation in Chad had not improved.  The American was released on 27 March 1995 because of the threat of death due to his diabetic condition.  The other hostages were freed on 28 March 1995.
BURUNDI.  Five people, including three Belgians, were killed in an ambush by Burundi Hutus near Bujumbura.  The Hutu gunmen targeted and killed the Belgians with shots to the head of the adults and chest of the four-year-old girl.
BAHRAIN.  A Pakistani man died in a fire at a video shop in Budaiya. Government officials insisted that the fire had been started by foreign forces in an attempt to undermine public security.
GUATEMALA.  A bomb prematurely exploded killing the person carrying the bomb near the Presidential Palace while UN Secretary General Boutros-Ghali was having dinner.  A passer-by was injured.
GEORGIA.  A group called Algetskiye Volki (Algeti Wolves) claimed responsibility for attacks on the Russian Embassy/Ambassador's residence and a Russian military building in Tbilisi.  Armed men forced security guards out of their booth at the Ambassador's residence before blowing it up.  Gunmen also opened fire on the headquarters of the Russian Group of Forces for the Transcaucasus (also was bombed 26 Jan 1995).  The note left behind said, For April 9, for Chechnya, for the bases and was signed Algeti Wolves.  The note referred to an agreement that allows Russian bases in Georgia and a demonstration on April 9, 1989 in Tbilisi where Soviet troops killed many Georgians.
SIERRA LEONE.  A convoy of cars belonging to the Irish Christian Brother order was ambushed by rebel gunmen on the road from Bo to Freetown.  One of the priests was killed.  The Revolutionary United Front is suspected.
GERMANY.  Five Turkish banks in Cologne suffered arson attacks.  Police arrested nine Turkish suspects believed to have connections with Dev Sol.
GERMANY.  A Turkish sports club in the town of Backnang in southern Germany was firebombed.  Turkish extremists are suspected.
COLOMBIA.  Two Italian employees of an oil company were kidnapped in northern Colombia near Barrabcabermeja by suspected ELN (National Liberation Army) gunmen who intercepted their car.  Their Colombian driver was killed.  The hostages were released in Nov 1995.
NETHERLANDS.  Two Turkish men were shot and wounded in a Turkish coffee house in The Hague by Kurdish extremists.  The gunmen warned against attending a demonstration the next day that was probably against the establishment of a Kurdish parliament in exile in the Netherlands.
ALGERIA.  A group of foreigners being escorted to their residences from work were attacked by armed gunmen.  Several of the security escorts were killed and wounded.  None of the foreign workers were injured.
UNITED KINGDOM.  An Iraqi citizen living in London who used to be Saddam Hussein's double was the target of an attack in which a man attempting to protect the intended victim was stabbed.  He suspects Iraqi agents.  No group claimed responsibility.
SRI LANKA.  A car bomb detonated but failed to explode near Katunayake Airport in Colombo.  The bomb was claimed by Ellalan Force who threatens to kill tourists and foreign investors unless the military stopped killing Tamils in the offensive in Jaffna peninsula.
PERU.  A Peruvian geologist working for the American company Crown Resources Corp. in Huamachuco was shot and killed by Sendero Luminoso rebels who were actually seeking an American geologist as it's target.
BURUNDI.  An International Action Against Hunger (ACIF) convoy of four cars and two lorries was attacked as it left Bujumbura.  One person was killed and four others injured.
GERMANY.  A Chrysler car dealership in Kassel was attacked in protest of the scheduled execution of Mumia Abu Jamal, former Black Panther leader, in the US.  Jamal was sentenced to death for murder.
FRANCE.  A co-founder of the Islamic Salvation Front, Abdelbaki Sahraoui, was shot to death in a Paris mosque by machine gun-wielding suspected Algerian Islamic extremists.  One other person was killed trying to protect Sahraoui.  The French police previously had found a hit list in a raid on a GIA cell in Paris with Sahraoui's name on it.  FIS spokesmen claim that the Algerian government is responsible for the assassination.
ISRAEL.  A bomb exploded on a commuter bus at 8:45 AM in Tel Aviv.  A suicide bomber detonated a 2 kg bomb as he stood in the middle of the bus. Six people were killed and thirty injured.  Hamas claimed responsibility for the bombing and an anonymous caller specifically named Yehiya Ayyash, The Engineer.  Ayyash, a Palestinian on Israel's most wanted list, was the mastermind behind the attack.  The Party of God - Palestine claimed the bombing as well, going so far as to name the suicide bomber.  This was the first bombing inside Israel since January.
GERMANY.  Seven Turkish targets firebombed in Germany.  There were no injuries.  The PKK is suspected.
GERMANY.  Seven Turkish targets firebombed in Germany.  There were no injuries.  The PKK is suspected.
GERMANY.  Turkish targets attacked in Germany.  The PKK is suspected.
GERMANY.  In the sixth consecutive night of attacks across Germany, the PKK are suspected to have firebombed a travel agency, a cultural club, a gift shop, and a cafe.  There were no injuries.
AFGHANISTAN.  Seven Russian air crew of a cargo plane were held hostage after being forced to land by Taliban rebels.  They were taken hostage after the contents of their cargo were revealed to be Kalashnikov rifles and 3.4 million rounds of ammunition.  The Taliban rebels believed that the cargo proved Russia's support for the Afghan regime.  They are demanding a list of 60,000 Afghans who they believe were taken to Russia and held there since the occupation.  The victims escaped in August 1996 in good health.
ISRAEL.  A heavily armed infiltrator was apprehended as he attempted to cross into Israel from Jordan.
FRANCE.  A Turkish sports and cultural center in Paris was firebombed. Six people were injured.  The PKK is suspected.
GERMANY.  Kurdish separatists are suspected in the firebombing attacks against three Turkish-owned businesses in Bonn.  A travel agency, restaurant and tea shop were attacked.
TURKEY.  Two bombs planted in trash cans exploded in central Istanbul killing two people, including a Jordanian woman, and injuring 30 others, including an American, an Austrian, an Italian, and a Jordanian.  The Kurdistan Islamic Unity Party claimed responsibility.
Sheikh Nizar al-Halaby, head of the Islamic Charitable Association (the organization which funds the Sunni Muslim Habashi group), was assasinated outside of his home.  Not long before the attack, grafiti appeared in Beirut in which the Habashis and the Partisans' League accused each other of betraying Islam.  Suspects arrested in the case claimed that they carried out the attack on the orders of Ahmed Abdul Karim al-Saadi, the head of Asbat al-Ansar.  On 3 January 1996 the Lebanese government issued a warrant for al-Saadi's arrest and he was later sentenced to death in absentia by a Beirut military court for his participation in al-Halaby's murder.NOTE: The type of weapon used in the attack was not reported.
FRANCE.  A bomb in an open air market in Paris near Place de Bastille failed to explode after the detonator mis-fired.  The small explosion caused by the faulty detonator, however, injured four persons.  The bomb consisted of explosives packed into a pressure cooker.  The GIA eventually claimed credit for this and the other bombings in their campaign in France.
ETHIOPIA.  Two Sudanese were shot dead by unknown gunmen.  One was the head of the International Islamic Relief Agency ,Abdella El-Ghalli, and the other with the World Islamic League, Alfatih Yusif.
IRAQ.  A car bomb with 15 kg of TNT exploded outside the offices of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) in Irbil.  One person was killed and several injured in the bombing.  The PKK are suspected.
West Bank.  A Palestinian man in the town of Halhoul in the West Bank was killed by a rightwing Jewish group called Ey Al.
SUDAN.  Twelve aid workers for Medecins Sans Frontieres Belgium were kidnapped in Panthou by rebels of the Southern Sudan Independence Movement (SSIM).  Eleven of the captives escaped but one Kenyan worker was unable to escape.  He was held until Oct 23, 1995 when he was released unharmed from Gogriel.
AUSTRIA.  A firebomb, that failed to ignite, was thrown at a German pharmaceutical firm hosting American visitors and flying the American flag.  Possibly connected to the bombing of the American International School but a group called the Red Daughters of Rage claimed that the company was involved with an American company that participated in forced sterilization in third world countries.
TAJIKISTAN.  Tajik opposition gunmen from Afghanistan's Badakhshan province crossed the border and attacked a truck carrying Russian Frontier Guard soldiers.  Six soldiers were killed and four others were injured.
FRANCE.  Another bomb exploded on the Paris Metro during morning rush hour as the train neared Quai d'Orsay.  Twenty-nine people were injured.  It was the eighth bombing by Algerian extremists in France since July.  The GIA claimed responsibility for the bombings in France.
SAUDI ARABIA.  A bomb exploded at a mosque in al-Qawba in Asir Province. Eight people were killed, including one Egyptian and one Indian, and 100 injured.
ANGOLA.  UNITA rebels attacked the village of Mutchokwe in Lunde Norte, a diamond mining region, killing two people and kidnapping 36 others, including four South Africans.  UNITA claims that the South Africans are mercenaries; authorities state they are miners.
AFGHANISTAN.  Rockets were fired onto the runway of Kabul's International Airport just as an International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) chartered flight was about to take off.  Three more rockets landed on the runway after the flight took off safely.  The attack is suspected to have been carried out by the Taliban Islamic militia.
PAKISTAN.  A bomb exploded on a railway track near Peshawar.  It is suspected that it was timed to hit an Awam Express train to Karachi, which was 30 minutes late.  The explosion occurred near an army depot and a public bus stop.  The police link this bombing to three other bombings that occurred over the next few days by suspected Afghani refugees.
Gaza Strip.  A suicide car bomber exploded a bomb near a bus just outside of the Qatif settlement in Gaza.  There were no injuries due to the army escort ordering the bus to back up after hearing the explosion of the first car bomb which occurred only minutes before (see above).A man suspected of buying the two cars used in the above bombings was arrested on November 4th.
EGYPT.  A tourist train from Luxor to Cairo was shot at injuring 10 passengers. al-Gama'a al-Islamiya claimed responsibility for the attack in a statement that again warned foreigners to leave the country.
GERMANY.  A house in Lage was firebombed by unknown attackers.  The six Turkish and two Portugese residents were unharmed.  The explosion blasted a large hole in the outside wall.  No group claimed responsibility.
JAPAN.  Small explosives were found on the power lines of the US base at Sagamihara near Tokyo.  One of the devices exploded but caused only minor damage.  US President Clinton was scheduled to be in Tokyo the following week.  There were no claims of responsibility but some suspicion fell on the groups Chukaku-Ha and Kakurokyo-Ha who had both threatened to disrupt the APEC (Asian Pacific Economic Council) meeting held 13-19 November in Osaka.
INDIA.  A bomb exploded outside of a restaurant in Connaught Place, New Delhi injuring 30 people including Dutch, Norwegian and South African tourists.  The bomb was 3.3 lbs of PETN, a plastic explosive, and had a sophisticated timing device attached to it.  The bombing was claimed by the recently founded Jammu Kashmir Islamic Front.  The group's spokesman said the attack was to protest atrocities by Indian troops in Kashmir.  It was also claimed by the Khalistan Liberation Tiger Force.
ISRAEL.  Guerrillas, presumed to be from Hezbollah, fired several volleys of Katyusha rockets into the Kiyat Shmona and Ezba Hagalil region of northern Israel injuring at least seven people.  The rockets were fired from the Lebanese Wadi Sluki region, a Hezbollah stronghold.  The attack was presumed to be in retaliation for the death of three Hezbollah members in an Israeli action the previous day.
ALGERIA.  Unknown gunmen opened fire on Lithuanian (also reported as Latvian) sailors in the Casbah in Algiers.  Two of the sailors were killed and one injured.  Moslem extremists of the GIA are suspected.
FRANCE.  A bank in Bayonne was firebombed in protest of the French government's deportation of a member of ETA.  ETA is suspected.
BURUNDI.  The offices and residences of staff belonging to the French-based International Action against Hunger (AICF) in Gitega were targets of grenade attacks.  Two foreign aid workers were injured.  The foreign staff were leaving the area while the local staff continued to provide aid.
SOMALIA.  A group of around 20 armed men kidnapped an Italian aid worker from Mogadishu.  The man, who worked for the Italian agency CEFA, was seized after an exchange of fire between the kidnappers and his bodyguards, during which one of the bodyguards was seriously injured.  It was suggested that while the kidnap took place in northern Mogadishu, an area controlled by warlord Ali Mahdid Mohamed, it was the work of the clan led by rival warlord Mohamed Farah Aidid which was in control of the southern part of the city.  A decision by CEFA to abandon its operation in southern Mogadishu was cited as the motive.  The man was released unharmed several days later.  No ransom was demanded, and an Aidid representative claimed that the man had been deported for entering Somalia without a proper visa.
GERMANY.  A bomb exploded at the Peruvian Consulate in Dusseldorf.  There were no injuries but the building housing the consulate was damaged.  The attack was claimed by the Anti-Imperialist Cell (AIZ).  A communique sent to a news agency claimed that the attack was in response to human rights abuses in Peru.
COLOMBIA.  An oil pipeline, jointly owned by Occidental Petroleum (an American company) and the Colombian state oil monopoly, was bombed in several places by the ELN and FARC.
INDONESIA.  Fourteen people working on a scientific expedition organized by the World Wide Fund for Nature were kidnapped by Free Papua Movement (OPM) members in Jayawijaya in Irian Jaya, the Indonesian half of New Guinea.  Amongst those kidnapped were four British, two Dutch, one German, and seven Indonesians.  The International Committee of the Red Cross used a number of representatives to negotiate the release of the hostages and visited many of the villages that the rebels belonged to.  The German hostage was released on 15 January on the condition that he would act as a negotiator between the government and the kidnappers.  In May 1996 Indonesian special forces mounted a rescue operation in which the foreign hostages and three Indonesians were freed.  Two of the Indonesian hostages were killed in the operation, as were six OPM guerrillas.
TURKEY.  A ferry sailing under the Panamanian flag, the Avrasya, was hijacked in Trabzon by Turkish-Abkhazian supporters of Chechen separatism, who threatened to blow up the vessel unless Russian forces allowed Chechen gunmen free passage from a siege in the Dagestani village of Pervomaiskaya.  Of the 160 passengers on board, 114 were Russian.  A security guard was injured during the initial assault on the vessel. After being refused entry to Istanbul because of the suspected quantities of explosives on board Turkish authorities, in association with the Chechen foreign minister, negotiated an end to the hijack.  Nine men were arrested at the port of Eregli and the ship then continued its journey. It arrived in Sochi, Russia, on 23 January 1996.
COLOMBIA.  An American citizen residing in Colombia was kidnapped by the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) guerrillas.  He was released 4 months later.
COLOMBIA.  Two men approached a guard outside the U.S.  Government Binational Center in Cali.  After questioning him about English lessons they disarmed him and shot him once in the leg, then fled the scene.
GERMANY.  An Iranian student, who was also a defector from the Iranian intelligence service, was kidnapped from his house in Bonn.  He was held and tortured for two days before escaping.  He claims that he was kidnapped by four Farsi speaking men.  Iranian government agents are suspected.
LIBERIA.  Members of the Liberia Peace Council in Zwedru kidnapped eight aid workers employed by Oxfam and Medecins Sans Frontieres.  They were released unharmed three days later.  The motive for the kidnapping was unclear, but presumably the incident was aimed at the Liberian government rather than the relief organizations themselves.
PHILIPPINES.  The Citibank headquarters in Manila (which also houses the headquarters of the Shell Oil Company) was fired on with automatic weapons and then attacked with hand grenades by at least four people travelling in one or more vehicles.  Authorities found a bag containing a grenade launcher, grenades, an assault rifle and priest's cassocks.  Police suspect the Abu Sayyaf Group.
ISRAEL.  A suicide bomber exploded a bomb on the No.18 Egged bus in Jerusalem.  The 22lb (10kg) bomb killed 23 people and injured 50 others. The Ezzedin al-Qassam, the armed wing of Hamas, claimed responsibility in retaliation for the killing of Yehiya Ayyash (presumably by Israeli agents) and also to mark the second anniversary of the Hebron massacre attack by a Jewish settler.  Three Americans died.
ISRAEL.  A suicide bomber exploded a bomb at 6:27AM on another No.18 Egged bus in Jerusalem.  The bus was on its way to the Central bus station. Nineteen people were killed and seven injured.  Hamas claimed responsibility.
GERMANY.  Turkey's consulate in Hamburg was firebombed and smeared with paint by a group of about 15 people.
IRAQ.  Four members of a Kurdish opposition group were killed in a village near the Kurdish-held city of Irbil.  Kurds blame Iranian agents.
INDIA.  A car bomb was detonated in a crowded Delhi marketplace killing at least twenty five people and injuring more than 50.  The Jammu and Kashmir Islamic Front claimed responsibility in protest for forthcoming polls and previous Indian Army killings.
CAMBODIA.  A British mine clearing expert and 31 other Cambodian mine clearers were kidnapped at Siem Reap by the Khmer Rouge.  A report in August claimed that a Thai newspaper reported that the Briton had been executed by his captors.  October brought a further report that he was alive but being forced to make homemade bombs for the Khmer Rouge.  In Nov 1996, it was reported that the man was turned over to Cambodian authorities 'weak, thin and unable to walk' but alive.  Another report quoted that the Khmer Rouge leader Khieu Samphan finally responded to letters and claimed that the National Army of Democratic Kampuchea was not involved in the case.  The British Foreign Office claimed the reports were premature.ADDENDUM.  It was reported on 20 January 1998 by the British Foreign Office, that he is 'probably dead'.
COLOMBIA.  An Italian engineer was abducted from a construction site in the Bolivar region of Northern Colombia.  FARC were suspected.  He was released on 7 July 1996.
ISRAEL.  Hezbollah guerrillas fired Katyusha rockets into northern Israel from their positions in Lebanon injuring 30 Israeli civilians.
PAKISTAN.  Two explosive devices were thrown over the wall of the US Information Service center in Lahore by unknown attackers.  There were no injuries.
INDIA.  Ten Nepali workers were kidnapped from Athwajan near Srinagar by Kashmiri rebels.  Eight were killed and two escaped with gun shot wounds.
PERU.  A 20 kilogram dynamite bomb was detonated in a stolen car by the Sendero Luminoso in the La Victoria district of Lima.  The bomb went off at 10.35pm at the Royal Dutch Shell Petroleum products warehouse and ten people were injured (one seriously).  There was considerable material damage caused to the warehouse and nearby buildings and cars.  The attack was likely meant to derail the proposed signing of a contract between Shell, Mobil and the Government of Peru to begin exploration of the Camisea gas fields in the Peruvian jungle.
LEBANON.  An Iranian dissident living in exile in Beirut was the target of an assassination attempt.  Men in cars opened fire on the victim, seriously wounding him.  He was taken to the American Hospital where Iranian diplomats arrived and attempted to have the victim turned over to them.
TAJIKISTAN.  Two Russian servicemen's wives were killed in a cemetery in Dushanbe.  The police suspected an Islamic extremist group known as Muzlokandov's Gang.
ISRAEL.  Two Israeli settlers were killed by the PFLP on the Israeli side of the border with the West Bank at Bet Shemesh.  The couple and their baby were travelling in a car when the attackers passed them and opened fire with automatic weapons.  The couple were killed but their baby was uninjured.
NICARAGUA.  Thirty-three election workers in Somotines near the town of Wiwili were kidnapped by Contra rebels and taken into Honduras.  Twenty eight of the hostages were members of Nicaragua's Supreme Electoral Council, three were officials in the Ministry of Agriculture and two were boatmen.  The hostages were released two days later.  Negotiations were undertaken by OAS and the Catholic Church's bishop of Esteli.  Army troops were withdrawn from the area.
SAUDI ARABIA.  A fuel truck bomb exploded outside the housing complex for USAF personnel in Dhahran on the King Abdul Aziz Air Base.  Nineteen American airmen were killed by the blast, which devastated the Khobar towers complex.  Over 500 people were injured in the attack.  A guard had been seen turning the truck away, which was then parked next to the perimeter fence whilst the occupants escaped in a waiting car. Responsibility has been claimed by Hizballah Gulf, the Legion of the Martyr Abdullah al-Huzaifi and the Islamic Movement for Change.ADDINFO:  In June 1997, a Saudi suspect was deported to the US by Canada. The suspect is a member of the Iranian Revolutionary Guards and the Saudi Hezbollah which is backed by Iran.  The suspect is offering information on the bombing in exchange for reduced sentencing on other charges against him.
GERMANY.  The British military's Quebec Barracks near Osnabruck was the target of a mortar attack by the IRA.  There were no injuries.  The attack occurred at 6:50PM.  Three mortars were launched from a truck/van with British plates parked outside the base and aimed at a petrol station inside.  The IRA claimed responsibility in a statement to RTE on 30 June 1996.  The daughter of nationalist civil rights activist Benadette Devlin McAliskey was arrested in Northern Ireland and extradited to Germany in connection with German police investigations into the attack.
GERMANY.  A Turkish prayer center in Frankfurt was firebombed.  A sheet with TKP/ML (Turkish Communist Party/Marxist Leninist) and the hunger strike lives written on it was found at the scene.
RUSSIA.  A vehicle belonging to the U.S.  Agency for International Development, parked outside the U.S.  Embassy in Moscow, was destroyed by fire.  Two tires and a rag soaked with diesel fuel had been placed underneath the car.  There were no injuries.
GERMANY.  A cafe in Cologne was attacked.  Molotov cocktails were thrown through the windows, causing considerable damage.  Five Turkish citizens were detained by police.
GERMANY.  A Turkish cultural center in Oberhausen was firebombed.  Turkish radicals were suspected of responsibility.
FRANCE.  The Turkish Embassy in Paris was attacked by a group of about 30 people using stones, sticks and paint, causing minor damage.
UNITED STATES.  The headquarters of the Nicaraguan Sandinista Liberation Front in Miami was set on fire.  The new offices were about to open but were still unoccupied.  There were no casualties but the damage was fairly serious.  The Sandinistas blamed supporters of right wing presidential candidate Arnoldo Aleman.
GERMANY.  A Turkish grocery store in Duisburg was firebombed.  It suffered minor damage.
GERMANY.  A firebomb attack targeted a Turkish-owned business in Dusseldorf.  There were no injuries.
ALGERIA.  It was reported in the London-based Arabic newspaper 'Al-Hayat' that two bombs were discovered and defused at Algiers airport shortly before the French Foreign Minister was due to arrive.  The Algerian government, however, denied the reports, claiming they were pure fantasy.
BOSNIA/HERCEGOVINA.  A bomb was discovered at the OSCE offices in Sarajevo following a telephoned warning.  The device was located and safely defused.  No group claimed responsibility.
MAURITANIA.  A man who tried to hijack an Air Mauritania flight was disarmed after he held a gun to the pilot's head.  The incident took place in Nouadhibou, the country's second city, where the man boarded the flight for the capital Nouakchott, which originated in Las Palmas.  The hijacker, a policeman from the northern town of Zouerate, entered the cockpit, pointed the gun at the pilot and demanded to be flown to Morocco.  The pilot struggled with the man, and the gun discharged, a bullet lodging in the ceiling.  The man was overpowered and the pilot flew on to Nouakchott, where the hijacker was arrested.
CORSICA.  Moroccan nationals were the target of bombings in two incidents in Corsica.  Property has been damaged but there were no casualties in the blasts.
COLOMBIA.  An Italian restaurant owner was abducted by FARC.  It is not known if he was released.
SRI LANKA.  Two grenades were thrown into a Korean Telecommunications International Office in Trincomalee in the east of the country.  There were no injuries.  The attack occurred as President Kumaratunga was returning from a state visit to South Korea.  The LTTE deny responsibility.
COLOMBIA.  FARC guerrillas burned three buses transporting workers for a Colombian affiliate of the Exxon Oil company.
COLOMBIA.  Suspected leftist guerrillas kidnapped an Italian oil pipeline engineer.  Eyewitnesses claim three men on horseback armed with submachine guns and pistols, seized the engineer and took off.  The ELN is suspected.
GERMANY.  A meeting to further friendship between Turkey and Germany was interrupted when two masked men threw a firebomb into the restaurant and then the entrance of the Hurturk Association.  There was some damage but no injuries.
INDONESIA.  A molotov cocktail was thrown at the US consulate in Surabaya causing slight damage to a guard house.  There were no injuries. Perpetrators were shouting I really hate the United States!.
FRANCE.  A bomb was found and defused in a church at Saint Laurent sur Sevre which the Pope was scheduled to visit.
COLOMBIA.  Three separate Dole banana plantations were set afire in Magdalena Department.
SOMALIA.  An aid worker for the Swedish Life and Peace Institute was kidnapped in Mogadishu.
CHECHNYA.  Three Italians working for the Intersos humanitarian organization were kidnapped from Chechnya.  They were released to the Italian embassy in Moscow November 29.
UGANDA.  A United Nations compound at Kampala was over run by rebels of the Lord's Resistance Army.  A Ugandan army captain and three others including two civilians were killed in the attack and a number of vehicles were burnt.
CAMBODIA.  Three French motorcyclists were kidnapped by Khmer Rouge defectors and then released the next day unharmed.  The three had been locally employed.
FRANCE.  Assassins fled the scene after shooting two members of the LTTE on a busy Paris street.  The LTTE have linked the deaths to an international conspiracy by the Sri Lankan government to wipe out Tamil separatists overseas.
ZAIRE.  Four Spanish Marist missionaries were hacked to death by Hutu militias.  Their bodies were found in a well at their mission.
COLOMBIA.  A Mormon Temple in Tulua was firebombed.  There were no casualties but the building was damaged.  Anti-US propaganda belonging to the ELN was left behind.
GREECE.  A firebomb destroyed a car belonging to the Netherlands' embassy in Athens while parked outside the building.  No one was injured.  A previously unknown group The Revolutionary Front claimed responsibility for the incident, linking it to the commemoration of the November 1973 student uprising.
FRANCE.  A street post was destroyed by a bomb in the Department Essonne near Paris.  Police believe that because the bomb was similar to that used in the December 3 Paris underground bombing that this was a test by the terrorists of a prototype device.  No one claimed responsibility but the Algerian Armed Islamic Group (GIA) were responsible.
TURKEY.  A Jewish businessman was killed by gunmen opening fire on his car while he traveled in Bursa.  The attack was claimed in retaliation for the assassination in Malta reportedly by Israeli agents of the leader of a militant Islamic group.
FRANCE.  A letter bomb was sent to the editorial offices of the French Jewish weekly Tribune Juive.  The bomb was sent in a video cassette concealed in an envelope, and was not detonated.  A group of Palestinian sympathizers claiming allegiance to no specific group later sent an anonymous letter to the paper claiming responsibility for the attack.
HONDURAS.  A grenade exploded outside the house of a US citizen employed by a Honduran subsidiary of an American company.  There were no casualties and no claim of responsibility was made.
GREECE.  A large explosion caused extensive damage to the branch office of Citibank, parked cars and adjoining buildings, in Athens.  There were no injuries and no group has claimed responsibility.
ERITREA.  Five Belgian tourists and their Eritrean driver were ambushed on their return from Asmara.  All six were killed.
UGANDA.  Fifty West Nile Bank Front (WNBF) rebels attacked and looted property from a project aided by World Vision at 8pm.  It was located at Madi Okollo in the NW district of Arua, 600 km from the capital.
UNITED STATES.  Four letter bombs were found at the Washington, DC offices of Al-Hayat, a London-based Saudi Arabian newspaper.  The plastic explosive bombs were sent inside musical Christmas cards and were postmarked from Egypt.  Two arrived in the morning mail and then two more arrived in the afternoon mail.  The National Press Building, which houses the Al-Hayat offices, was evacuated and searched.
UNITED STATES.  Two letter bombs, also sent inside musical Christmas cards, were sent to the Federal Prison at Leavenworth.  Kansas.  They were addressed to Parole Officer and postmarked from Egypt.  One of the World Trade Center (1993) bombers is an inmate at Leavenworth.
SOUTH AFRICA.  A bomb exploded at a mosque just after midnight in Ziniaville, near Rustenburg, injuring two security guards.  The pipe bomb was packed with commercial explosives.  A caller representing the Boere Aanvals Troepe (Boer Stormtroopers or BAT), an extreme right wing group, claimed responsibility for this bombing as well as the three others that occurred the same night. A Sudanese citizen was injured.
ISRAEL.  There were two explosions in a run down area of Tel Aviv that wounded 13 people including two policemen.  Pipe bombs had been placed in trash bins about 50 yards apart exploding 10 minutes apart.  No one has claimed responsibility but Palestinian terrorists are suspected.  There's still a possibility of criminal motivation rather than terrorist.
UNITED STATES.  Four letter bombs, addressed to the Saudi Arabian newspaper Al Hayat, were discovered and safely defused at the UN where the paper has offices.  They were similar to all the others that have been sent to Al-Hayat's offices in Washington and London.
UNITED KINGDOM.  The London office of the Al-Hayat arabic language newspaper received four letter bombs.  One bomb exploded wounding two security guards.Eighteen letter bombs postmarked from Alexandria, Egypt on 21 December 1996 were sent in musical Christmas cards.  One bomb exploded, the others were dicovered and safely defused or detonated.  The US State Department announced a $2 million reward available for information leading to those responsible for the letter bombs.
LEBANON.  South Lebanon.  Three Israeli soldiers were killed by a bomb planted in a road in Israeli-occupied south Lebanon.  One other soldier was injured.  Hezbollah claimed responsibility stating that the attack was to mark the month of Ramadan.
TAJIKISTAN.  Two Red Cross workers (a Briton and a Tajik) and a Tajik and four Russian journalists were kidnapped near Dushanbe by Sadirov, the same Tajik rebel warlord who kidnapped the UN observers the previous day.  The journalists were covering the previous day's kidnapping. They are still demanding that their men in Afghanistan be allowed safe passage to Tajikistan.  The Red Cross suspended their aid operations in the area.  Two of the Russian journalists and the Tajik Red Cross worker were released in exchange for seven rebel supporters on 14 February.  The two remaining Russian journalists were released on 16 February.  The other hostages were released on 17 February.
ETHIOPIA.  Grenades were tossed into the Belaneh Hotel in Harer killing two Ethiopians and wounding seven others.  Among the injured were British, German, Dutch and French citizens.  No one claimed responsibility.
HONDURAS.  Bombs exploded outside five American fast food outlets in San Pedro Sula during the night.  A Burger King, Friday's, McDonalds, Pizza Hut, and Wendy's were damaged by the bombs.  There were no casualties. The bombings occurred at a time of crisis over government pay.
ECUADOR.  An American geologist, a British technician and two Ecuadorian scientists working for an Argentinian oil company were kidnapped by Achuar Indians in Shimi.  The Ecuadorians were released the next day.  In exchange for the foreigners, the Indians demanded $2 million.  Following a pact in which the company agreed to halt oil activities, ask for authorization to enter the territory, and pay 5 mn sucres, the foreigners were released on 21 February.
COLOMBIA.  A Norwegian employee of Shanska is missing, feared kidnapped.  The Swedish engineering and construction company has had employees kidnapped previously under claims that the project threatened the environment.
GEORGIA.  A landmine killed three Russian peacekeepers in Gali, Abkhazia and one was injured.  A Georgian partisan group called the White Legion are suspected.  A second landmine exploded as an ambulance responding to the first landmine blast ran over it.  Three Russian medics were killed. The White Legion deny any involvement.
NIGER.  A Canadian aid worker with the Canadian Centre for International Studies and Co-operation and three Niger colleagues were kidnapped by Toubou rebels of the Revolutionary Democratic Front (also reported as the Revolutionary Armed Forces of the Sahara).  Two of the Niger captives were released in March 1997.  The Canadian, Serge L'Archer, was released after 12 weeks on 26 May 1997.
JORDAN.  A 26 year old Jordanian soldier (Ahmed Dagamseh) killed seven Israeli children at a park.  The gunman was sentenced to life in prison in July.
NIGERIA.  Oil giant Shell reported 126 Nigerian staff held at six oil installations overrun by local Ijaw villagers who were protesting the relocation of the newly created Warri southwest local government headquarters in the Delta area.  Eighteen hostages were released on 24 March, 12 on 25 March, 31 on 26 March, and the final 50 on 27 March 1997. Nine hostages managed to escape throughout the week.
NETHERLANDS.  Three attacks on Turkish targets occurred within an hour of each other and all in the Schildersbuurt neighborhood of The Hague.  An arson fire killed a Turkish woman and five of her children.  A firebomb was thrown at the Azerbaijani-Turkish Center.  Another firebomb was thrown at the Turkish Islamic Association building.  There are reports that these attacks were racially motivated, however, the US State Dept. reports that PKK or the Turkish Grey Wolves are suspected.
CAMBODIA.  Four grenades were thrown into the middle of a demonstration led by Sam Rainsy of the Khmer National Party against the governing Cambodian People's Party in Phnom Penh.  Nineteen people were killed, 100 injured.  Among the injured were an American and a Chinese journalist.
ALBANIA.  Gunmen fired at the U.S. ambassador's (Marisa Lino) residence in Tirana, hitting three cars, but injuring no one.
BOSNIA-HERCEGOVINA.  Police defused 23 landmines planted along the route that the Pope John Paul II would travel on his visit to Sarajevo just hours before the motorcade passed through.  No one claimed responsibility.
FRANCE.  The Paris consulate of the Islamic Republic of Iran was attacked by an assailant throwing a Molotov cocktail.  No casualties or damage was  reported.  The assailant was arrested and is suspected an Iranian national.
CAMBODIA.  Vietnamese workers were attacked by Khmer Rouge in Barkeo district of Ratanakkiri.  Nine people were killed and ten wounded.
MALI.  The head of the U.N.  Commission for Refugees office (Martin Bucumi) in Kidal was kidnapped from his home and then abandoned in a remote desert three days on 28 May.  His car and cash were taken.  This was the second time in six months he has been kidnapped.
GERMANY.  A gang of right-wing extremists attacked four Turkish men at a motorway service station in the eastern state of Thuringia at night.  The men were detained by police.
BAHRAIN.   Four Indian nationals were killed in an arson attack on an upholstery store in Manama.  They lived above the store.  Shia extremists are suspected
ALGERIA.  A French woman was killed in Bouzeguene.  The GIA is suspected.
SRI LANKA.  The LTTE abducted the Indonesian crew of a ferry and then destroyed the ship. They were released three days later.
SPAIN.  Three small bombs exploded at a beach near Lloret del Mar, a tourist resort.  There was no damage and no injuries.  The bombings are seen as the start to ETA's summer campaign against tourism.  A warning was phoned in to a local newspaper.
COLOMBIA.  Two people working for a US mining company in El Bagre were kidnapped by the ELN.  One was Canadian.  He is assumed to have been working on the release of the US employee being held by FARC.
COLOMBIA.  A Cano Limon-Covenas oil pipeline (American?) in Norte Santander was bombed by ELN which caused a major oil spill.  Several million dollars were lost.
ALGERIA.  A French Roman Catholic bishop (Pierre Claverie) was assassinated by a bomb blast at his residence in the Western Algerian city of Oran hours after he met with the visiting French Foreign Minister in Algiers.  On 22 August 1997, Algerian security services shot dead three Moslem guerrillas suspected of killing him, and they also arrested four other men who confessed involvement.
YEMEN.  Four Italian tourists were kidnapped in Khamir.   They were released the next day.
CUBA.  A bomb exploded at 3:00AM at the Sol Palmero Hotel in Varadero Beach.  A report refers to another bombing at the same beach but did not identify the hotel.An investigation found that a Salvadoran criminal ring was directed and financed by Cuban exiles in El Salvador and Miami to carry out the bombings.  A key player in the bombing campaign was Luis Pasada Carriles, a long-time anti-Castro Cuban.  Cuban police arrested a Salvadoran and charged him in six of the eleven bombings and linked him to the Cuban American National Foundation (CANF).
ISRAEL.  Three suicide bombers attacked the Yehuda shopping mall in Jerusalem. Seven people were killed including one American teenager.  200 people were injured.  Izz-el-Din al-Qassam Brigades (HAMAS) claimed responsibility.
SRI LANKA.  The LTTE attacked a Chinese ship with rocket-propelled grenades.  At least twenty people were killed or injured, including five Chinese.  There was also major damage to the ship.  LTTE claimed responsibility.
INDIA.   A Japanese and four Australian passengers were killed when three bombs exploded on a train in Uttar Pradesh.
TURKEY.  Two Bulgarian and one Turkish engineers were kidnapped by the PKK.  The Turkish engineer was killed.  The Bulgarian hostages were released 16 October.
GREECE.  The Athens office of Alitalia airlines were damaged by a bomb claimed by the International Revolutionary Struggle protesting against Italy's repression of prisoners.  The device was homemade and placed outside the building.  This office was also targeted by an unknown group in April this year.  See 4 April.
PHILIPPINES.  An Irish priest was kidnapped in Marawi by suspected Moro Islamic Front members.  They demanded $192,000 in ransom and release of promised funds under the amnesty program.  The priest was released on 4 November.
PHILIPPINES.  A Belgian priest was kidnapped by former MNLF members.  He was released after the government agreed to speed up dispersal of funds owed to them.
PHILIPPINES.  A Belgian priest was kidnapped by MNLF members in Ozamis.  He was released on 19 November.
YEMEN.  An American, two Italians, and two other westerners were kidnapped by Yemeni tribesmen near Aden.  They were upset about a fellow member being evicted from his home. The hostages were released on 27 November.
RUSSIA.  Chechnya.  Five Polish workers with Caritas, Poland (a Catholic charity) were kidnapped.
The Loyalist Volunteer Forces (LVF) opened fire on the Glengannon Hotel in Dungannon specifically to kill doorman Seamus Dillon, a former Irish Republican Army (IRA) assassin who had spent more than 10 years in prison.  The act was in response to the recent killing of LVF leader Billy Wright by the Irish National Liberation Army (INLA).  Three other people including a 14-year-old boy were injured.
A bomb thrown into the District Center II did not cause any damage.
Bomb experts defused an explosive device on a bridge on the outskirts of Than To in Yala Province.  The incident is linked with other incidents perpetrated by the Pattani United Liberation Organization (PULO) and government authorities believe the acts were committed by the PULO.
A small bomb hidden in a purse was left in the Tretyakouskaya metro station in Moscow near the Tretyokou Gallery.  It detonated shortly after being moved into the employee lounge.  Police gave no indication who might be suspected.  However, Chechen rebels performed a similar act two years earlier.
Two explosive charges were thrown and exploded at a kindergarten playground in the Avraham Avinu neighborhood of Hebron.  Jewish settlers reacted by climbing up on the roof of the casbah.
Unknown attackers fired upon the car of Rahim Tahir, a top Iraqi Embassy official, as he was departing from his home.  The car was damaged but Tahir was unharmed.
Tolib Boboyev, former deputy prosecutor of the Leninabad Region, was killed on Saturday evening with a submachine gun.  No one has claimed responsibility.
Unknown individuals threw Molotov cocktails at the Mapfre Insurance Office, Seguros Bilbao Insurance Office, Banco de Santander, BBK bank, and Argentina Bank.
The police station in Kumanovo was bombed, causing serious damage.
A security guard was critically injured by a bomb blast at the National Television Network (NTN) station in Georgetown.  The People's National Congress (PNC) are heavily suspected of perpetrating the violence.
A bomb went off at the Le Meridien Pegasus Hotel, breaking 14 glass doors and windows, but no one was hurt.  The People's National Congress (PNC) has been blamed for the attack.
The army blames the National Liberation Army (ELN) for dynamiting the Cano Limon-Covenas Pipeline.  This is the second attack on the pipeline this year.
A grenade, which did not go off because it was damaged, was placed near a Vietnam Association Office and the residence of Hanoi's military attach. The placement of the explosive was also near the German embassy and was placed on a national holiday commemorating the overthrow of the Khmer Rouge regime. The Khmer Rouge organization had recently threatened to plant explosives in crowded areas, near embassies, and diplomat's houses.
Two Swedish missionaries, a husband and wife, were kidnapped in Makhachkala by Chechen rebels.  The couple were members of an international charity mission in the area and came to Russia in December of 1997.  After a week in captivity in Russia, the rebels moved the victims to Chechnya where they held them for five months.  Authorities managed to free the couple on 24 June 1998 during a police operation.  No ransom was ever demanded for the return of the missionaries.
Two inhabitants of North Ossetra were kidnapped in the settlement of Mayskiy.  The event was meant to destabilize the situation in the zone of the Ossentian-Ingush conflict.
A letter bomb was placed in the mailbox of the home of an Army Corporal who was at one time the bodyguard of Army General Jaime Garcia, a Military Governor of Alava Province.  The explosion slightly injured a woman, Ana Belen Hernandez Herrero.
Three gunmen arrived at the Mominpura graveyard in a Jeep and sprayed a Shiite congregation with bullets.  Sipah-e-Sahaba Pakistan (SSP) had been accused of the incident.  The attack come around the time of the anniversary of the death of the SSP chief Zia Farooqi in a bomb attack on 18 January 1997.  Lashkar-e-Jhangri, a breakaway faction from SSP, later claimed the attack.
Daghestani police defused a car bomb parked near a local administration building in the capital, Makhachkala.
An unidentified person fired a grenade into a policeman's home.  The bomb caused material damage but no casualties.
A butane gas cylinder carried by a bus passenger exploded on an urban transportation bus in Seville.  The explosion and fire that followed injured two people.
An explosive device went off on the side of a road as the car carrying Sverdlovsk's governor, Eduard Rossel, passed by.  It is believed that the plotters were aiming at arranging a car crash.  There were no casualties.
An explosion in the Antwerp Century Center shopping arcade shattered the windows of two cafes, injured five people, and left a hole in the floor.  Although the cause is unclear, the event took place near the Jewish community which has been targeted in the past.
The state-owned Colombian Petroleum Enterprise reported that the Cano Limon pipeline was dynamited.  The blast contaminated the La Gritane stream that supplies drinking water to more than 200 families in the region.
Abkhazia's central customs office was bombed, killing two and injuring six others.  The Abkhazias believe that Georgian guerillas were responsible for the explosion.  This is one of many recent explosive attacks around the region.
An Iki grocery store was bombed in Kaunas.  The store was owned by George and Oliver Ortiz.  Iki grocery stores are the first Western style grocery stores in Lithuania.  The attack caused $2500 of damage to the store and $50,000 damage to the municipal electric network.  This is an international incident because the store is the first western style store in the area.
The Ulster Defense Association (UDA) claimed responsibility for shooting and killing Larry Brennan, a Catholic taxi driver.  Brennan was shot four times while sitting in his car outside a taxi depot in Belfast.
A bomb exploded at the office of Petron Oil Corporation, three days after the implementation of oil price increases.  The Alex Boncayo Brigade (ABB) claimed responsibility for the attack.
An explosive device was detonated at noon in the Yemeni capital of Sanaa.  The bomb was in a car belonging to the al-Rawayshan Trade and Contractors company.  The explosion caused only slight damage to the car targeted.
Ben Hughes, a 55-year-old Catholic who was sitting in his car after leaving work in a Loyalist area in central Belfast, was shot at least four times by a lone gunmen believed to be a member of the Ulster Defense Association (UDA).  Attacks have come as the Irish Republican Army (IRA) rejected the joint governmental blueprint for peace.
A police officer in Narathiwat Province was gunned down by two men on a motorcycle.  The event coincides with the extradition of three Muslim terrorist leaders caught in Malaysia.
John McColgan, a Catholic taxi driver, was shot and killed by a Loyalist Volunteer Forces (LVF) gunman.  The act is part of a wave of violence associated with the peace process.
A bomb planted on a scooter exploded in the Sadder area of Karachi near Jehangir Park, injuring one person.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) claimed responsibility for an explosive device that detonated at a bank.  The event coincides with two other attacks occurring on the eve of the Liberal Party's National Convention.
A bomb blast injured fifteen people on a bus near the town of Gujranwala.  The police blame terrorists attempting to disrupt the Muslim festival of Eid ul Fitr.
A bomb blast at Multan railway station injured six.  Police believe the bomb was intended to disrupt the peace ahead of the Muslim festival of Eid ul Fitr.
Unidentified gunmen, believed to be foreign mercenaries killed twenty-three persons.  They dragged five women and two chidren out of their homes, killed them and burned their houses.  Authorities believe the incident is related to recent elections or Republic Day.
A roadside bomb exploded as a truck drove by on a road inside Israel's security zone, killing the driver.  Muslim guerrillas are blamed for planting the explosive device.
A bomb exploded inside a shrine near Lahore, injuring fifteen people.  This incident could be connected to the end of Ramadan.Note:  On 11 January, a similar attack took place in Lahore.  In this particular incident, twenty three Shiite Muslims were killed.
An explosive device planted in a tin can went off in the Petrinja wood industry Finel, killing one and injuring four.  Investigators are unsure if the bomb was left behind following Croatian Army Operation Storm or planted by a terrorist.
Eric Robert Rudolph, a right-wing extremist, detonated an explosive device with a remote control outside the New Woman, All Woman abortion clinic in Birmingham, Alabama.  The blast killed one security guard and seriously injured a nurse.  Rudolph, who was sentenced to life in prison for this attack and a bombing at the 1996 Atlanta Olympics, says that he perpetrated the attacks as part of a guerilla campaign against abortion, the homosexual agenda and the U.S. government.
Vincent Cochetel, the head of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) mission to North Ossetia, was kidnapped by three armed criminals.  Cochetel, a French citizen was released in December 1998 after ten months in captivity.  During the operation to free the hostage, two law-enforcement officers were injured.  Cochetel was freed without preconditions or ransom being paid.
An explosion occurred as a bulldozer cleared away snow.  The shock wave blew out the windows of nearby apartment blocks.  Investigators have not ruled out the possibility that it was a terrorist attack.
A fragmentation bomb placed in a soft-drink box in a garbage can exploded, injuring a Romanian citizen who was hauling the trash.  The garbage can was located in an IETT bus station in Istanbul's Eminonu quarters.
An explosion went off at the LukOil filling station on the Riga-Kaliningrad road in Siauliai.  The blast hurt no one and caused insignificant damage to the petrol station.  Police say the bomb had been planted in a trash bin at the toilet.
One person was killed and one injured in a strong car explosion in Mostar.  The explosion was in the eastern part of the city where Muslims live.  It is not known if the explosive was a bomb or a grenade.
The Loyalist Volunteer Forces (LVF) claimed responsibility for firing shots at a man in a passing car in Lurgan.  It is understood that the man had been threatened by the LVF in the past, including a warning the day before to leave the area within 24 hours.  The man escaped unhurt.
A remote-controlled bombing device went off in a garbage can, injuring Crimean First Deputy Prime Minister Anatoliy Safontsev and his guard Roman Garkusha.  The bomb was politically motivated, aiming to destabilize the situation in Yalta.
Claude Erignac, the Prefect of Corsica -- the highest representative of the French state on the island -- was shot and killed by two or three men.Note:  On 7 February 2003, two men of French origin were arrested in Venezuela and are believed to be connected to this incident.  On 4 July 2003, Yvan Colonna, who is suspected of being the triggerman in this assassination, was arrested and brought before a judge of liberties and detention.  His arrest sparked increased separatist violence all over the island of Corsica and led to a no vote in a Coriscan referendum which aimed to grant the island limited autonomy on 6 July.
Hezbollah fired mortars at settlements along the border between Israel and Lebanon.  There were no casualties or damage reported.
An explosion shattered the windows of a house belonging to Senad Kahva.  The explosion caused no injuries.
A bomb was defused in Tiberkanine.
The National Liberation Army (ELN) bombed the pipeline that carries crude oil from Cano Limon to Covenas Port.  Approximately 15,000 barrels of hydrocarbons were spilled.
The Slovak police arrested two young men from Dunaszerdahely who were carrying a large amount of TNT and weapons near the Gabcikovo dam.  The explosives were equipped with a remote control.
A man believed to have been a Protestant, was shot and killed on the outskirts of Belfast.  He was ambushed by a gunman wearing a baseball cap.  The killer ran off on foot.
A public security officer arrested a youth who attempted to throw a Molotov cocktail at the wall of the British Embassy in Amman.
Twelve non-tribals were injured after being gunned down.  Several houses were also set on fire.
Police believe the Mardi Gras bomber is responsible for an explosion that occurred in a man's car after he picked it up near a Sainsbury store.  The explosive device was reportedly hidden in a plastic bag.  The man was slightly injured.
A bomb was planted near a business owned by Tafalla mayor Luis Valero, a member of the Union of the Navarrese People.  The bomb did not explode.
Three people were injured when an explosion ripped through a section of an apartment house.  Two elderly women and a man were injured.  The bomb was a remote-controlled device.
Several Molotov cocktails were thrown at the branch of Credit Lyonnais at Saint-Jean-de-Luz, damaging the windows and the building.
A Molotov cocktail was thrown at the vehicle owned by Antonio Gila, the Socialist Deputy mayor of Ansoain.  No one was injured.
A bomb exploded at a playground in Coimbatore city, killing four boys and injuring three other children.
17 November (17N) is suspected of being involved in the bombing of the General Motors dealership in Northern Athens.  No one was injured, but the dealership was wrecked.  Authorities believe the bomb was in protest to the US bombing of Iraq.
The United Revolutionary Front claimed responsibility for detonating an explosive device at the Municipal Palace.  The explosion caused damage to the building which houses the Libertado mayor's office and the Municipal Council function.  One person was injured in the attack.
A homemade bomb went off near a weekly market in the Birkhadem suburb of Algiers, killing two people and injuring 32 others.
Sinn Fein has accused loyalists of planting a bomb under a taxi owned by a former Republican prisoner.  The car bomb was defused.
Five kilograms of tritol were thrown into the main waterline, causing the pipe to split and cutting off the water supply to Kukes and 15 other villages.  The attack is expected to raise popular discontent.
Zoni Revolutionary Army (ZRA) extremists killed seven Kuki tribesmen including two women.  Thirty houses were also set on fire.
Fifteen masked men, some from Montenegro, shot at a police station in Northern Albania, attempting to destabilize Shkoder.  The terrorists released their friends and set fire to the building.
The Continuity Irish Republican Army (CIRA) is suspected of being involved in a car bomb blast in Portadown that caused extensive damage to shops and businesses in the mostly Protestant area of the town.
A bomb was deactivated in the political headquarters of State candidate Alberto Villamizar.
Two bombs were planted on the site where Russia's last Tsar, Nicolas II and his family were executed in 1918, damaging a memorial cross and a chapel.
An explosive was placed in an economy class compartment of the Karachi-bound Super Express train, killing four and injuring nineteen.
Five people were killed and seventeen injured in a bomb blast in a bus on Tasrur Road in Gujranwala.  The bomb had been placed at the rear of the bus.
The private car of the Secretary General of the Basque Country Socialist Party, Juan Carlos Merino, was set on fire and completely destroyed by two unidentified individuals.
The Irish National Liberation Army (INLA) claimed responsibility for a bomb that exploded on the grounds of a Belfast integrated school.  Four people -- two police officers and two civilians -- were treated for shock.
Two people were killed, and three were seriously injured in an explosion near the al-Rahman Mosque in Aden.  One of the victims was a bodyguard for Shaykh Muqbil Bin-Hadi al-Wadi'I, one of the most senior leaders of the Salafi movement in Yemen, who was preaching in the al-Rahman Mosque during the incident.
Jorge Lorenzo Escandon, the mayor of Neiva, was kidnapped.  No further information is provided.
A car bomb was deactivated by the Irish Army.  Police link the car to the Continuity Irish Republican Army (CIRA).
The 59th Front of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) kidnapped Esther Cristina Canales, a former deputy; the campaign manager for Horacio Serpa's presidential campaign (El Cesar Department); and four other individuals were campaigning in Guatapuri.
Albanian terrorists killed forester Kadri Jasiqi in the Jasic village.  Jasiqi was killed because he was loyal to the Serbian state and because he was a state employee.
Thirty-two people were killed and another 252 wounded when a powerful bomb exploded in a private bus near the Maradana Junction around 12:40 p.m.  The explosives-laden bus (carrying two bombs made out of RDX and C-4 explosives) was occupied only by its driver who ignored calls by police officials to stop the vehicle.  The bus had been caught in traffic when it exploded, damaging around twenty vehicles.  The AFP (10 March) reports that the government believes the intended target may have been an official motorcade and that the driver detonated the explosives when ...he was about to be booked for a traffic offence.  The Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) are blamed for this attack.
A homemade bomb, which had been planted in an abandoned school in Bouskene, exploded at 10:00am, killing one person and injuring one person.
Rebels from the Carlos Alirio Buitrago Front of the National Liberation Army abducted the secretary general of government from Corcona and San Fransisco Councilmen Orland Giraldo, Alfonos Garcia, Francisco Castano, Francisco Duque and Marco Tulio Posada. They were abducted for ''political reasons and to ...make known a tentative proposal toward a peace agreement.
Five persons were killed and thirty-five injured due to a powerful explosion on the 22 Dow Chiltan Express Train at the Chhanga Manga railway station.
An explosion went off at a power station in Novo-Kuli, Dagestan.  Authorities believe that the explosion was part of a well planned terrorist attack aimed at destabilizing the situation in Dagestan.
Two policemen were injured when unidentified attackers opened fire on a patrol vehicle in Istanbul's Gazi quarter.  Muhittin Yildirim, chief superintendent of the Gaziosmanpasa District Security Directorate, received head wounds from this attack.
Police bomb-disposal experts defused a powerful bomb in front of the Independent Smallholders' Party headquarters.  The explosive was intended to intimidate the party.
Experts carried out a controlled detonation of an explosive device found in the tax office of Alcobendas.  It was the third device planted in one day.  The First of October Antifascist Resistance Group (GRAPO) claimed responsibility for the attack.Note:  There were two other attacks against tax offices in Madrid on this day.  All were claimed by GRAPO.
A makeshift device exploded near a school in Birkhadem, injuring five people.  The explosion caused panic among pupils about to go to their classes.
A parcel bomb exploded at the bus station in Afula, seriously injuring one man.  The device, hidden in a box, exploded when this man picked it up from a park bench next to the bus station.  Several Arabs were detained by the police in connection with the blast.
The Loyalist Volunteer Force (LVF) claimed responsibility for a St. Patrick's Day attack on a crowded club in Larne.  Army bomb experts blew up the device, and no one was injured.
A Molotov cocktail was thrown at the Basque Railway electricity substation, starting a fire that caused damage but did not interrupt the Basque Railway.
Eight people were injured and two were taken hostage in an attack by the Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG) on Abung-Abung Village.  ASG has threatened to kill the two hostages -- identified as the Canas Plantation Supervisor Ricardo Caso and his bodyguard Danny Santos -- if 300,000 pesos is not paid for ransom.
Two homemade bombs were defused at a school in Thenia.  The devices were set to go off when the children were about to join their classmates.  The Armed Islamic Group (GIA) may be responsible.
Ten Colombians, four US citizens, an Italian, and a Mexican were kidnapped by the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) at an illegal roadblock set up between Santa Fe de Bogota and Villavicencio.  The ten Colombians were released.  The US citizens have been identified as Louise Augustine, Todd Marks, Peter Shen, and Thomas Fiore; the Italian identified as Vito Candela; and the Mexican has yet to be identified.
Five border guards were injured in an explosion in the village of Chuburkhinji.  The border guards were traveling in a car on a motorway when the explosion occurred.  Some believe that Georgia guerrillas planted the bomb.
Unknown perpetrators planted explosive devices which demolished three Bosniak and two Croat houses.  The Bosniak houses were owned by Hasan Obradovic, Meho Obradovic and Halil Obradovic.  The Croat houses belonged to the Coko family.
Several people were injured as a bomb went off in a resident building in Chisinau.  The bomb exploded between the third and fourth floor.  Residents from nine apartments were evacuated.  At least two people were admitted to the Central Emergency Hospital, several others were admitted to Hospital 3.
The anarchic group, Arsonists of Conscience, claimed responsibility for setting a Turkish Embassy car on fire.  The damage is estimated at about 1 million drachmas.
The Arsonists of Conscience claimed responsibility for a fire bomb placed in the car of the Turkish Military Attach, Col. Ahmet Haluk Arabacibasi.  The bomb caused a fire that destroyed the vehicle but did not injure anyone.  This attack follows an attack on a Turkish Embassy car on 28 March 1998.
An Abu Sayyaf  Group (ASG) spokesman Asmad Alahuddin claimed responsibility for the assassination of Rey Bangcayrin (two years after the fact), a newsman at the dxLL radio station. He noted that the assassination had been carried out because of Bangcayrin's criticism of ASG and warned other newsmen against following the same path.
Two bomb blasts damaged six shops and affected the power supply in Karachi.  The government terms these attacks as ...a fresh conspiracy of a foreign hand which is aimed at preventing foreign investments in Karachi and creating hurdles in the democratic system.
A gas-canister bomb damaged the political offices of Labour Undersecretary Christos Protopapas and the former Office of the Labour Minister Miltiades Papaioannou.  A second bomb exploded on the third floor.  The attack was claimed by November's Children.
A car bomb intended for the British mainland was found in a BMW car stopped at the port of Dun Laoghaire.  There was speculation that the bomb was meant to throw the peace process into further turmoil.
Seven people were injured when a bomb exploded in Arzew's weekly market.
A security guard caught Tyhor Benchuk attempting to detonate a homemade explosive device near the entrance of the presidential residence in Minsk.
Two Burundians were wounded when a bomb exploded at an open-air Italian-style Fenice on the terrace of the Speke Hotel, opposite the Sheraton Hotel in which US President Bill Clinton stayed when he visited Uganda in March 1998.
The car of Qalandar Haidarov, Chairman of the Tajik Shakhrinavsky District, came under fire.  The driver was killed instantly, and Haidarov was severely injured.  According to witnesses, Abdullo Mirzoyev, Chief of the Interior Department of Shakhrinaf District, fired at the car.
There was an explosion outside the Russian Embassy building in Riga.  The explosive device was planted in a rubbish bin in the park across the road.  There were no casualties.  The explosion shattered concrete from the rubbish bin, damaging diplomatic cars.
Someone broke a window and threw a bottle of flammable liquid into the Fargo Women Health Organization abortion clinic.  Police recovered blood and skin at the scene indicating that the attacker was injured.
One person was killed and eleven injured in a bomb explosion in Khairpur.  No further information is provided.
A pipe bomb was discovered in the western window of the Parliament's northern faade.  The bomb detonated as members of the Explosives Division were attempting to remove the bomb to defuse it in a secluded area.  The bomb destroyed windowpanes, but no one was hurt.
US tourist Michael John Bolar was kidnapped by unidentified individuals on a road that leads to Guatemala's Atlantic region.  Bolar was accompanied by two Honduran tourists, Ana Maria Melgar and Rosa Julia Caballeros, who were freed but had to be hospitalized due to injuries inflicted by the kidnappers.
Two soldiers and seven tourists were wounded in an explosion behind the Underground Palace in Istanbul's Sultanahmet neighborhood.
The Mercedes-420 belonging to the Director of the Roskom Firm was blown up outside his house in Kemerovo.  There were no casualties.
Eleven Negev communities were left without water after the desert area's main water line was sabotaged.  Mekorot water authorities believe the damage to be the work of terrorists.
Five women were injured by an explosion at the Siauliai Tax Inspectorate.  The explosion broke twenty windows and several wall partitions.  The explosives were placed in a trash can in a corridor of the building.
A soldier of the South Lebanese Army was killed while traveling in his private car along the Azur-Jazzin road in Lebanon.
A makeshift bomb exploded along the patrol fence of the Jewish settlement Gush Qatif.  The bomb caused no injuries or damage.
A dynamite attack on Barrancabermeja Palace of Justice left losses that surpass 1 billion pesos.  The attack is believed to have been the work of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC).  The terrorists immobilized the two guards and placed 30 kg of dynamite on the first floor of the building.
Approximately ten Palestinian shepherds entered the Ma'on farm and began throwing rocks at the farmer.  Another Israeli, armed with a handgun rushed to his colleague's aid, but the Palestinian snatched the gun and used it to shoot both the Israelis.  A third farmer who rushed to the scene was pelted with stones and injured.  One Israeli was killed and two others injured.
A council worker, Adrian Lamph, was critically injured in a gun attack in Portadown.  A lone gunman on a bike fired a single shot at the victim who later died at the Craigavon Hospital.  The Loyalist Volunteer Force (LVF) is believed to have been responsible for the attack.
A powerful charge, used in tandem with a gas canister, was placed in the chimney of a house at a villa in Cardo.  No one was hurt in the attack, but extensive damage was caused to the property.
Armed Albanian terrorists took Milo Radunovic, Slobodan Radosevic, Milovan Vlahovic and Milka Vlahovic hostage in Dasinovac.  Radunovic and Radosevic were killed, while Milovan and Milka Vlahovic were spared.  All of the victims are elderly and refused to leave their homes when their families fled earlier.
A homemade device exploded at the National Network of Spanish Railways station at Amurrio.  Although the attack caused extensive damage, there were no casualties.  The police established that an explosion of two gas cylinders and a number of Molotov cocktails caused the damage.
The Sixth Street South office of the Liberal Party Presidential candidate Horacio Serpa Uribe was bombed, killing one person.  The attack is an attempt to intimidate his followers and tarnish the electoral process.  It coincides with an attack on his office at Caracas and 37th Street.
At least twenty-one people belonging to two families were brutally murdered by unknown assailants in indiscriminate firing in the border village of Bandala Mohra.  The killed included nine women and children.  Several others were seriously injured.
An explosive device caused slight damage to a post office located in the village of Villarreal.  The device was composed of inflammable liquid.
The car of former Jordanian Intelligence Chief Mohammed Kilani was set on fire outside his home.  Note:  A car belonging to Abdel Rahim al-Kilani, one of Mohammed's sons was set on fire last year, a few days after the former intelligence chief was appointed by King Hussein to investigate the Israeli schoolgirl killings.
An Arab man was stabbed and slightly wounded in Jerusalem's Me'a She'arim neighborhood by an unidentified attacker.  This is the fourth stabbing incident of an Arab man in Me'a She'arim in the last two months.
A group of hooded individuals set fire to the tax office in Renteria.  The group burst into the office, forced customers and employees to leave, sprinkled gasoline over the furniture and floor and set fire to the building, causing extensive damage.
Three mortar shells exploded near the building of the Khovar news agency in Dushanbe.  One of the shells hit a tree.  The other two fell on the road and on the ground.  No one was injured in the attack.
A Serbian news source reports that Albanian terrorists fired several grenades from grenade launchers at the Babaloc refugee settlement near Decani.  No one was injured in the attack.
The Arsonists of Conscience group claimed responsibility for an attack on the offices of the Press and Mass Media Minister Dhimitrios Reppas in Athens.  The explosive device caused damage to the office.  No injuries were reported.
Nazif Basota was killed in the village of Bobovac when a group of armed Albanians fired upon his house with automatic weapons.  Basota was known as a loyal citizen of Serbia.
Four people were killed in Surankot.  No further information is provided.
A senior Prison Services Officer, Dr. Ya'aqov Zigelboim, was killed in a car bomb explosion near Zerifin.  Officials blame supporters of the jailed Yemenite Jewish activist, Uzi Meshulam, for setting the bomb.  Zigelboim had received death threats in the past from Meshulam's followers.
Peru's Vice President Cesar Paredes Canto was attacked by unidentified individuals in his Cajamarca Province office.  A projectile went through his office in the direction of his desk.  The Vice President was unharmed.
Vehbii Mustafa, an employee of the Kosovo Electricity Production and Supply Company was killed and his colleagues, Bosko Vlahovic, Esad Muminovic and Miso Mijovic as well as an employee of the forestry company, Dragan Djurisic, were wounded when a group of Albanians opened fire at their van near Visoki Decani Monastery.  The group was on their way to the Koznjer hydroelectric power plant.  The power plant was later closed.
The Corsican National Liberation Front-Historic Wing (FLNC-Canal Historique) claimed responsibility for an explosive device that went off outside the building of the Regional Council of Provence Alpes-Cote d'Azur (PACA) in Marseilles.  No one was injured in the attack.
A grenade was thrown in the front of a house belonging to the Zajmi family and the casualty department.  Two private cars and an ambulance vehicle were damaged in the blast.  Windows in nearby buildings were shattered.
The Real Irish Republican Army (RIRA) claimed responsibility for throwing two mortar bombs at the Belleek Royal Ulster Constabulary station.  Authorities believe that the attack was to wreck Sinn Fein's ballot box strategy.
A bomb exploded in Borsky Mikulas, destroying a private bakery.  The blast coincides with another blast that occurred in Bratislava.
Members of the so-called Bagramyan Battalion, made up chiefly of people of Armenian nationality, set fire to the administrative building of the village power grid.  No one was injured in the attack.
The Ertzaintza deactivated an explosive device that was sent to the public prosecutor's office in San Sebastian.
Guerillas raided a human rights NGO in Bogota, causing unknown amounts of damage.
Israeli extremists burned down the Bab al-Ghawanimah, one of the al-Aqsa Mosque's main gates.
A Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) suicide bomber killed Brigadier Larry Wijeratne, Sri Lanka's top military commander for the region of Point Pedro (Jaffna peninsula).  Wijeratne and his two guards were traveling towards his camp in Point Pedro when the suicide bomber, believed to belong to the elite suicide squad Black Tigers, threw herself in front of his military vehicle, killing him and his two guards.  AFP reports that Defense sources believe that Wijeratne's death is a serious blow to the military's hearts-and-minds campaign to woo the local residents from the Tamil Tiger guerrillas.Note:  Wijerane was the head of the military in Vadamarachchi, the birthplace of the top LTTE guerrilla leader, Velupillai Prabhakaran.
The Corsican National Liberation Front-Canal Historique (FLNC- Canal Historique) claimed responsibility for an attack against the police station in Aix-en-Provence.  A bomb went off outside the police station, damaging the building and seven vehicles parked nearby.
Two people were killed and seven others injured in two blasts which occurred in two hotels in the Gulshan-e Iqbal area of Karachi.
A car belonging to the counsel of the Libyan Embassy was destroyed by a makeshift explosive device in Agia Paraskevi, an Athens suburb.  Three other cars belonging to Greek officials were also targeted on this night.
A bomb exploded near the Ionian Bank in Athens.  The attack was claimed by the new group, Fighting Guerrillas of May.  The attack caused considerable damage but no injuries.Note:  The offices of several government ministers have been the target of recent arson attacks.  Olympic Airways and Ionian Bank are at the center of the government's cost-cutting plans to restructure state-run utilities and services.
Ethnic Albanians kidnapped Dostana Smigic in Smigici.
Members of Mehdi Hashemi's Gang broke the windows of Baghiatalah-e Azam Institute in Najafabad and set it ablaze.
Three Molotov cocktails were thrown at the National Action Party district representation in Umraniye.  There were no casualties, but the explosion caused some damage to the building.
A bomb exploded in front of retired General, Herald Bedoya's political office in Barrancabermeja causing extensive damage and injuring Jesus Barajas, a security guard.  Bedoya is running for President in upcoming elections.  Authorities attribute the attack to the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) or the National Liberation Army (ELN).  Both had threatened to sabotage the national elections.
A mine was found at a school in the town of Votinsk.  Police disposed of the explosive device.  Motives are unknown.
A bomb was defused at the Pereira office of Liberal candidate, Horacio Serpa.
Nigerian villagers in the Ilaje region abducted two hundred engineering personnel (employed mainly by McDermott, a subcontractor for the US oil giant Chevron) who were working for the oil industry.  The hostages were held on a barge off Ondo State coast in the Atlantic Ocean and released after four days.  The Nigerian villagers took the hostages to protest the company's failure to share the wealth obtained from oil revenues with the villagers.
Twenty ethnic Georgians were taken hostage by an Abkahaz armed group.  The Georgians lived in the Gali region.
The President of the Department Assembly of Arauca, Edgar Gonzalaz, was shot and killed by assassins.
One person was seriously injured in an explosion at a restaurant in Vinkovci town center.  The explosion took place when the streets of the town were teeming with people.  Another passerby was also slightly wounded.
The People's Liberation Army of Kurdistan (ARGK) carried out an attack against a police station in Van, killing twenty soldiers and destroying all the military positions around the police station.  The attackers also seized a great number of weapons and destroyed a war tank.
The Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) is believed to have been behind the kidnapping of Bartolome Rubia Munoz, a Popular Party Councillor from La Carolina.
Cumali Akkurt, a police officer stationed at the Democratic Left Party building in Sisli, was attacked and killed by four armed assailants.  One attacker was injured in the attack.
The National Liberation Army (ELN) kidnapped seven voting officers and stole election documents in Sardinata.
Unknown people left two bombs in the garden of the private television channel, HBB.  One bomb exploded, causing minor damage to the wall of the garden.  The second bomb was defused by bomb experts.
Four Georgians were taken hostage by an Abkhaz armed group in Ganakhleba.
A radical Japanese leftist group, Chukakuha, claimed responsibility for an early morning attack in Matsudo on three buses used on Narita airport routes.  The group opposes expansion of the Narita airport.
Two people were killed and two injured in an explosion at the Islamic Revolution Court in Tehran.  The Mujahideen-I-Khalq (MKO) claimed responsibility for the attack, stating that the attack was carried out in retaliation for the slaying of eight members of the group in a clash with Iranian security forces last November.
A pipe bomb left on a Metro train at the Agua Salud station in Caracas was defused by the Directorate of Intelligence and Prevention Services.
Unidentified militants stopped a village minibus near Sagman village and shot its passengers, killing nine people and wounding two others.  The minibus was driven by Muammer Ozdogan.
Three bomb disposal experts were killed while attempting to defuse a bomb not far from a post of the National Gendarmerie in Issers.  Two other people were injured in the explosion.
The Leftist Nucleus group claimed responsibility for an explosive attack on the eighth floor of the News Channel TV station.  Minor damage was reported.
A group of unidentified individuals raided a construction site on the main Tunceli-Pulumur highway and set three business vehicles on fire.  The group abducted ten workers when they fled but later released them.
Unknown individuals threw an incendiary device at the offices of the weekly publication, El Far del Llobregat.  The device exploded at the iron door, causing minor damage.  No one was hurt in the attack.
Two people were killed and three injured when Abkhaz militants opened fire with automatic weapons on the inhabitants of Chuburkhinji.
A number of unknown persons set fire to the telephone exchange in Lizarza, the birthplace of the alleged Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) activist, Ignacia Zeberio, who died on June 5th.  The ETA is expected to have perpetrated the act.
The transportation of coal by the railroad between La Jagua de Ibirico and the port of the Drummond multinational corporation in Cienega was interrupted after a dynamite attack that destroyed a section of the tracks.  Police suspect the 19th Front of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) to have been responsible.
A group of armed individuals hijacked two buses with passengers in the area of Zilga village.  An hour later one of the buses together with the passengers was set free.  The passengers of the other bus were proclaimed hostages.
The country home of Oleg Gurenko, the deputy mayor of Angarsk, was doused with gasoline and set ablaze.  Oleg and his wife were able to escape unharmed.  This attack is linked to Gurenko's tough attitude toward local corrupt officials and criminals.
A Palestinian man was shot and killed in an attempt to place an explosive charge on a fence surrounding Morag settlement.  A second Palestinian was involved in the attack but escaped unharmed.
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) are presumed responsible for a bomb explosion at an agriculture development bank that injured four persons.
A group of unidentified individuals threw a total of nine Molotov cocktails at the Eusko Tren (Basque Train) station in Usansolo.  The damage was minimal.Note:  A similar incident took place two days earlier (11 June 1998) in the Tenteria area.
The home of a Protestant family on the outskirts of Derry suffered a petrol bomb attack.  It is reportedly the third time the family was targeted.  Nationalists living in the area are being blamed for the attack.  Note:  Information accessed at http://cain.ulst.ac.uk/othelem/chron/ch98.htm on 9 October 2002.
Twelve people were injured when a powerful bomb went off in a brothel in downtown Istanbul.  The Islamic Front of the Grand Orient Raiders claimed responsibility for the attack.
Two people died and eight were injured when a bomb exploded in a minibus in Osh.  The device was filled with metal fragments and nails in order to increase the killing power.  It is speculated that the purpose of the attack is to aggravate the situation in Osh.
An unidentified individual planted a bomb in a car in the eastern district of Karachi, damaging the car.  The car was a red Toyota Corolla Z-8770.  It was blown up near the National Stadium, injuring one bystander.
Ayatollah Agha Mirza Al Gharavi, an Iranian religious figure residing in Najaf, was killed on his way from Karbala to Najaf.  The identity of the murderer is unknown.
Up to eight persons were injured when a bomb explodednear the office of a local daily newspaper in Karachi.
Three people were killed and thirteen injured when a homemade bomb exploded in Khemis Municipality.
A homemade bomb exploded outside the offices of the extreme right-wing newspaper, Stochos, in downtown Thessaloniki, causing damage but no injuries.  The bomb was placed at the entrance of the newspaper's fifth-floor office.
Three hand grenades were fired at the U.S. Embassy near Beirut.  The grenades landed around 500 meters from the building, causing no casualties.
One man was killed as a riot police car hit a mine in Kizlyar.  The car was loaded with police officers from Lipetsk who had been dispatched to Dagestan to help local police maintain order at the Chechnya border.
Two people were killed when an explosive device detonated in a garden in the village of Medic Polje.  One of the victims was a Bosnian Croat, and the other victim's identity is unknown.
People's Liberation Army of Kurdistan (ARGK) guerrillas hit and destroyed a tanker transporting diesel oil.  The tanker caught fire and was totally destroyed.
An explosive device destroyed the Mercedes car of Mustafa Beco, Deputy Chairman of the Zepce Islamic Community.  His son Armin suffered serious injuries in the attack.
Unknown attackers shot Mikhail Alborov and Aleksey Bibiyev who were gathering hay outside the village of Sunzha.  The attackers escaped in the direction of Ingushetia's village of Galashki.
Unidentified persons fired seven or eight shots from a car into the ATV television station building in Istanbul.  Four of the bullets hit the window of the building.
An explosive device was thrown at the gendarmerie barracks at Burgo.  The blast damaged the doors and windows of the building.  One gendarme suffering from severe shock was admitted to the hospital.  This is one of two explosive attacks on gendarmerie barracks in Corsica on the same night.
A policeman was injured by an explosive device planted in the building which houses the Supreme Council of Personnel Selection.  The attack was claimed by the Revolutionary Cells and may be related to the way teachers are hired or possibly to the Ionian Bank privatization.
An explosive device was thrown at the house of Enes Dzonlic, a refugee returning to the Brcko area under Annexe 7 of the Dayton Accord.  Dzonlic has all necessary documents from international institutions to return to the village.  No one was hurt in the blast, but there was considerable material damage caused.
Unidentified terrorists ambushed a paramilitary rangers patrol  killing one police office, Dildar and injuring the head constable, Mumtaz.  During the same incident Imran Ali, a private citizen was kidnapped and shot to death.  Shahid Khan, a private citizen, was also injured.
Two petrol bombs were thrown at the window of the home  of an elderly Catholic couple in Londonderry.  The blast set fire to the living room and both residents were treated for shock.
A bomb exploded at the crossroads of the neighborhood of Dardania in Pristina, damaging at least three cars and the Vocar drugstore which is under Serb management.  No one has claimed responsibility for the attack.
Unknown individuals set fire to a Banco Central Hispano cash dispenser in the town of Pasajes, completely burning it out.
A Renault Espace car driving in the direction of central Warsaw exploded and severely injured a resident of Warsaw, Thomasz J.  A bomb had been placed under the Renault.
An unidentified individual threw three hand grenades at the residence of Hun Sen, Cambodia's Second Prime Minister.  Hun Sen was in Siem Reap at the time of the attack.  This is the third attack involving explosives in Phnom Penh since National Assembly elections were held on 26 July.  The two major opposition parties have been holding demonstrations since, claiming fraud and demanding Hun Sen's resignation.
A powerful bomb blast near Shaheen Complex in Karachi injured two people and caused three vehicles to catch on fire.
Two people were killed as they attempted to plant an explosive device under Ljubisa Savic-Mauzer's car.  Savic-Mauzer is the head of the Bosnian police force.  The bomb -- set to go off as the car door was opened or the engine started -- went off, killing the two would-be assassins.
Two people were injured when their vehicle set off two mines placed outside a house under renovation.  One of the wounded was a Croat Serb and one was a Croat.  This is the latest incident in the context of previous threats against the return of former Croatian-Serb inhabitants to the area.
One person died and several others who were watching a World Cup soccer final were injured in two sequential bomb blasts in Kampala.  Bull Sesimba died at Isabella Pub and Godfrey Lubwama had his left leg blown off at Slow Boat Pub.
A group of separatists dragged Zeki Boztep, Recep Turkman, Sinan Turkman and Feriha Turkman to the village center and after delivering a speech on the separatist organization, massacred the four individuals.  After burning a house, the separatists escaped.
A Jewish settlement organization, the Committee for the Security of the Roads, claimed responsibility for an attack against vehicles of the Palestinian police in Bethlehem.
Six people were killed and three injured seriously when Bodo militants opened fire on a group of people who had gone to Tipkai reserve forest to collect firewood.  All victims belong to the minority community.
Two police officers were slightly injured when an explosive device sent to a business address at Limerick exploded while it was being dealt with by Irish Army experts.
Between fifteen and twenty hooded individuals attacked the Ertzaintza station in Amorebieta with Molotov cocktails which burned out two Ertzaintza vehicles.  No one was injured in the attack.
Unknown persons intercepted the van distributing the Pamplona daily Diario de Navarra newspaper and burned the copies of the paper.
An explosive device went off near a building used as a canteen by prison officers, causing serious damage.  No casualties were reported.  The Corsican National Liberation Front-Historic Wing (FLNC-Canal Historique) claimed responsibility for the attack.
A bomb exploded near the railroad station when the international train from Bucharest to Athens was in motion.  The bomb coincides with two other attacks, one on a military barracks in Kumanovo and one on a publishing company in Skopje.
An explosion took place near the office of the District General, causing damage to the building in Mudiyah.
Two hooded individuals threw a number of Molotov cocktails at the Basque Socialist Party headquarters in Leioa.  The attack caused little damage.
Shots were fired at Israeli settlers near the settlement of Itamar.  Police found bullet cartridges at the scene.  There were no casualties reported.
An explosive device went off at a privately owned supermarket in Makhachkala, killing one woman.  No further information is provided.
Two people were killed and at least five were injured in an explosion in a Harayan Roadways bus at the Interstate Bus Terminal in Delhi.  The blast ripped apart the rear of the bus and shattered the windowpanes of several other buses.
Eight people were killed by militants in Jhana.  The militants entered the town and began to fire indiscriminately.
Two Catholic brothers were shot and injured in a loyalist area of Londonderry.  Police are calling the attack sectarian.
Five homes, belonging to Bosniaks were blown up in the village of Pjesevac Kula in protest of the return of the Bosniaks to the area.
An unidentified person threw an explosive device in front of a trolley bus in central Sarajevo.  No one was injured in the blast.
One person was killed, and thirteen others were injured when a parcel bomb exploded on a taxi-bus in Baraki near Algiers.
A bomb exploded in Pristina near two Serb cafes which police officers are known to frequent. The attack caused no casualties, and it coincides with another in a residential area.
A firebomb was thrown at a truck near the al-Ram junction of North Jerusalem.  The driver was slightly wounded.
An explosive device went off in a Livnobus (transport company) traveling between Jajce and Split near the Turist Hotel.  Four passengers were injured in the blast.
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) guerrillas attacked the town of Cordoba, damaging the mayor's office, a bank branch and a telephone office.  In addition to the damage, two policemen and one civilian were killed.
Thirty-five laborers were killed and six others wounded when a group of unidentified individuals opened fire indiscriminately on the village of Himachal Pradesh as the residents were sleeping.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) blew up the Cano-Limon oil pipeline in La Pesquera.
Two people were killed and three others seriously injured when a bomb that was placed on the road near the village of Ouled Ali exploded
Police have arrested Haris Hadzibecirovic for throwing a grenade in Novi Grad municipality.  The explosion damaged several cars, but no injuries were reported.
A group of separatists abducted two shepherds and eight hundred animals at Kagizman.  The separatists set the shepherds free and opened fire on the animals.
A suicide car bomb exploded outside the U.S. Embassy in Dar es Salaam.  The attack coincides with another suicide attack on the US Embassy in Kenya.  The blast killed at least eleven individuals and injured seventy-seven others. No Americans were killed in the attack, and it is unclear how many were injured.  Osama Bin Laden's group Al-Qaeda has claimed responsibility for the blast.In October 2001, Mohamed al-'Owhali, Khalfan Khamis Mohamed, Mohamed Odeh and Wadih el Hage were sentenced in a New York court to life in prison for their roles in the two attacks.  This was the first US prosecution involving members of Al Qaeda.
A group of hooded individuals staged a Molotov cocktail attack on the first carriage of a Eusko Tren (Basque Railway) in Irun.  No one  was hurt in the attack.
Nestor Gallego, Vegachi's mayor, was kidnapped by rebels from the Maria Cano Front of the National Liberation Army (ELN).  No further information is provided.
The bomb disposal unit carried out a controlled explosion of a suspicious package at the gates of President Nelson Mandela's Cape Town office.  The  device was planted ahead of Palestinian President Yasir Arafat's arrival at the Parliament.
An explosion occurred in Mijici which was followed by three bursts of automatic fire that could be heard five minutes later.  The attack is possibly related to those who are unhappy with the return of Bosniaks to the Jablanica area.  No further information is provided.
UN officials with the United Nations Special Mission in Afghanistan (UNSMA) were attacked in Kabul. One man, an Italian Colonel, Carmine Calo, was killed in the incident. The attack was made in broad daylight on a UN vehicle taking the officer and a French colleague to the UN offices.  The attack comes on the heels of U.S. strikes in Afghanistan to try to eliminate terrorist cells, after the UN embassy explosions in Kenya and Tanzania.
Two top Communist Party of India-Marxist (CPI-M) leaders, Prem Singh Orao and Rathiyo Orao, were shot and killed by militants in Pramodnagar.
Tulia Marganta Martinez, the mayor of San Francisco (Antioquia Department) was kidnapped.  No further information is provided.Note:  Incident date is approximate.
An explosive device went off at one of the gas stations in the city of Stavropol.  No injuries were reported.
An explosive device detonated and caused considerable damage to a Christian Orthodox Church in Shkoder.  Police are investigating this attack.
Rabbi Shlomo Ra'anan was stabbed to death in Hebron.  A Palestinian terrorist entered his mobile home, stabbed him with a knife, set the house on fire and fled.  Haya, Rabbi Ra'anan's wife, suffered smoke inhalation.
Two people were injured in a bomb blast that occurred on El Hamdania Beach in Cherchell.
Radio Pristina journalist, Djuro Slavuj and his driver, Ranko Perenic, are believed to have been kidnapped in the municipality of Orahovac.  The two men were on assignment in Orahovac and the surrounding areas.  Their vehicle is also missing.  Sources believe that the assailants are armed Albanians.
Asadollah Lajevardi, Iranian Revolution Public Prosecutor and Evin Prison Director, was shot and killed by two gunmen affiliated with the Mujahideen-I-Khalq Organization (MKO).  The group later claimed responsibility for the attack.  Also killed were Lajevardi's brother and a passerby.
A group of armed men opened fire on a police public assistance center in Isabela, killing two people and injuring several others.  The attackers are thought to be members of the group Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG).
A bus was stopped by unknown individuals and burned near the Renteria stop.  All passengers were forced off the bus before the fire was ignited.
Unidentified person threw an incendiary device into the courtyard of the American Information Center in Pristina.  There was no major damage caused by the attack.
Authorities disarmed a powerful bomb that was placed along the cross-country oil pipeline that carries petroleum products from Russia to Western Europe. If the bomb had detonated,  the blast would have had serious consequences both economically and environmentally.  Police are investigating the origin and motive for the bomb.
An explosive device was detonated in front of a two-story building which houses the offices of the Socialist Party, The Trade Union Confederations, The Veterans Association and The Kosova Association.  The explosion caused material damage but no injuries.  Two people were later arrested in connection with the blast, Ferdinand Luigj Gavoci and Rudolf Mark Morana.
Mohammad Ismail Memon, chairman of the Board of Secondary Education in Karachi, and his driver were killed by unidentified assailants while he was returning home from his office.
Less than a month after an attack on the security service's building in Zinjiibar (Abyan Province), a grenade attack on the same building injured two passers-by and damaged part of the wall.
The home of Fahra Ejanovic, a Muslim in Visnjica Polje, in Kiseljak Municipality, was damaged extensively when an explosive device was thrown into the basement.  The blast started a fire, which caused some damage.
Seventeen people were killed and at least sixty-eight others were injured in a powerful car bomb blast that took place in Makhachkala outside a local television center and on the same street that Makhachkala Mayor Said Amirov and Prime Minister Khizri Shikhsaidov live.  The blast caused a fifteen-foot crater in the street and severely damaged the TV building, as well as ten other buildings nearby and destroyed fifteen homes in the area.  Russian President, Boris Yeltsin declared two days of national mourning and called the attack a challenge to the unity of the country.  This is the most recent attack in Dagestan, an area that has seen an increase of explosive attacks and kidnappings as various religious and ethnic groups compete for power.  The central government in Moscow tends to label these attacks as criminal in order to focus its economic funds and efforts on the Chechen conflict.  In February of 2005, the Dagestani Supreme Court charged Magomed Mukhtarov with organizing this attack.  A jury found Mukhtarov guilty.  A second organizer, Magomed Khanov is already serving a life sentence for this attack.
Just over an hour after an explosive device detonated in downtown Macao, a second device exploded, injuring four police officers and ten journalists who had responded to the first attack.
A car carrying Tomislav Sakic, the Milici Municipal Assembly Chairman and a member of the Milici Municipal Council and his driver was shot at by unknown gunmen as they drove through Milici.  Neither man was injured in the attack.
An Italian Missionary, Luciano Benedetti, was abducted from the island of Mindanao, 900 km south of Manila, by rebels who were thought to be a part of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF). He was released 68 days later,  although no ransom was paid.
A hydroelectric plant in Jaguas (Antioquia Department) was blown up by Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) guerrillas.  No further information is provided.
Azem Hajdari, an Albanian opposition leader who had strong ties to Ibrahim Rugova, a Democratic Party deputy, was shot and killed as he emerged from his party's headquarters in Tirana. Hajdari was also a close associate of former Albanian President Sali Berisha. It is believed that the assassination was carried out as a warning to moderate forces among political representatives of ethnic Albanians in Serbia's southern Kosovo and Metohija provinces.
A single gunman hijacked Turkish Airlines Flight 145 that was scheduled to fly from Ankara-Istanbul.  The hijacker who was armed with a toy pistol rerouted the plane to Trabzon.  The hostage situation only lasted three hours when the hijacker surrendered himself and safely released the seventy-six passengers and eight crew members that were on board.  DPA reports that the perpetrator was protesting a ban on wearing headscarves in Turkish universities and public offices.
Three hand grenades were found in the yard of Sveti Sava Elementary School in Sribinje.  A student noticed the first grenade, which had been wrapped in gauze and set on fire.  Luckily the fire had burnt out and the device never exploded.  A janitor found the other two devices around the school grounds.  The perpetrator had left 40 dinar tied to the fuse of the devices with fishing line to ensure that whoever reached for the money would be harmed.  About 1000 students attend the Sveti Sava School.
The Revolutionary People's Liberation Party-Front (DHKP-C) claimed responsibility for shooting a light antitank weapon (law) at the Directorate of Police in the Fatih neighborhood of Istanbul.  The rocket hit the building but there were no reported casualties.  The group said the attack was perpetrated in order to find out what happened to four men who were arrested in March 1998 and who haven't been heard from again.Note:  On 12 October, six people, with ties to the DHKP-C, were captured in Izmir in connection with this incident.
Argemiro Reyes, the mayor of Concepcion (Norte de Santander Department), was found dead on a countryside road.  No further information is provided.
Ahmet Krasniqi, a key figure in Kosovo's separatist fight against Belgrade and a close advisor of Ibrahim Rugova was shot dead as he returned to his home in Tirana. Krasniqi was known as the Kosovo repuvlic's armed forces chief of staff and was former colonel in the Yugoslav army until 1991. This is the second murder of a Rugova advisor in Tirana in the last two weeks. It is believed that the assassination was carried out as a warning to moderate forces among the political representatives of ethnic Albanians in Serbia's southern Kosovo and Metohija provinces.
A homemade bomb -- consisting of a small steel cylinder filled with nails --  exploded at the entrance to the Finance Police Superintendency in Milan.  The blast caused damage to the building and to a bus passing by at the time.  One passenger on the bus was slightly wounded.  Originally, an anonymous caller claimed the attack on behalf of the Yellow Brigades, but on 25 September 1998, a member of the Padanian Armed Separatist Phalanx (FASP) also claimed responsibility for this attack.
A group of hooded individuals threw flammable liquid into and set fire to a van belonging to the Post Office, causing damage to the van but no injuries.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) blew up the 45th kilometer marker (between Uvita and Bojaba) area of the Cano Limon-Covenas pipeline.  The attack came only one day after the pipeline was repaired following an attack a few days prior.Note:  The incident date is approximate.
A grenade attack on a main road through Jaar was reported.  No further information is available.
Shots were fired at a group of Israeli hikers near Pet Hadassah in Hebron, injuring a 40-year-old woman in the leg.
The Anori Commando of the National Liberation Army (ELN) destroyed the landing strip and airport in the town of Amalfi (Antioquia Department).  No further information is provided.
A remote-controlled bomb exploded on a boat that was transporting opposition fighters to Tajikistan from Afghanistan.  The incident occurred along the Tajikistan-Afghanistan border.  No injuries were reported.  At least one group of opposition fighters had crossed the border without incident before the attack.  The opposition fighters were eventually to be sworn into the Tajikistan army as part of a reconciliation process.
An explosive artifact detonated outside a police station in Portoviejo, killing one policeman and injuring two others.  This attack could have been carried out to mark the national strike in Ecuador which protests against an unfair economic package implemented by President Jamil Mahuad.Note:  Incident date is approximate.
At least four people were killed and forty injured when a bomb exploded near a mosque in Sialkot, located in Punjab province.  The bomb, which contained 2 kg of explosive was planted on a bike close to a mosque believed to belong to the militant Ahle Hadith group.
The car of an Knesset Member (MK) Ran Kohen (Meretz) was burned in front of his house.  Police officials speculated that Kakh activists were responsible for the arson.  It was apparently an effort to prevent Kohen from having a shrine around Barukh Goldstein's grave dismantled.Note:  Goldstein had massacred Arabs in Hebron in 1994.
Hezbollah gunmen fired mortar shells and rockets into al-Rayhan village, wounding two people.
Twenty kilograms of explosives were found at the Regional Audit Offices in Bastia.  No further information is provided.
A bomb exploded in the courtyard of an administrative building that houses the Commission for National Reconciliation in Dushanbe.  The explosion caused damages to the building, but no injuries.  News agencies reported that two other bombs exploded in residential areas of the city within a half hour of each other, however no information on the attacks, including their target, was available.
Two reports with the Yugoslav Tanjug news agency, Nebojsa Radosevic and Vladimir Dobricic, were kidnapped by Kosovo Albanian gunmen as they drove from Pristina toward the village of Magura.  The Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) stated that it was holding the journalists on 22 October, and promised to release them soon.  By 1 November, however, the two journalist had been tried in an Albanian court and sentenced to 60 days in prison for violation and disrespect of the regular internal civilian and military dispositions of the UCK.  With international support, authorities managed to demand the release of the journalists, who finally returned to their homes on 27 November.
National Liberation Army (ELN) guerrillas intercepted a judicial commission in Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta, kidnapping six officials from the Office of the Prosecutor General and thirteen others.  The commission was investigating a massacre in the rural area of Sierra Nevada when they were ambushed by rebels.  One of the kidnapped managed to escape to a town to report the incident.  Note:  On 22 October, eight of these kidnapped were found alive by members of the Red Cross.   Incident date is approximate.
An anonymous tip was received about an explosive device located in the port of Piraeus in Athens.  Unfortunately, the explosive detonated ten minutes before the caller reported it was going to, causing damage to the offices but no injuries.
Akhmad Khadzhi Kadyrov, the mufti of Chechnya, was nearly killed when a remote-controlled explosive device detonated twenty meters from his car as he drove from his office in Grozny.  Kadyrov was unhurt but his driver was slightly injured in the blast, which caused a crater two meters deep and is being described as the most powerful explosive device triggered in the area since the end of combat operations.  This attempted assassination comes one day after Shadid Bargishev, a leading anti-kidnapping official was killing in a very similar blast in Grozny.  Authorities are calling these two explosive attacks twins.
A Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) commando set fire to fuel storage tanks in Toroyaco.  No major damage was caused.Note:  Incident date is approximate.
A bomb exploded at the Belfort Town Hall, causing extensive damage but no injuries.  The attack was later claimed by the Breton Revolutionary Army (ARB).  The group puts forward economic arguments only for this attack and hints at the closure of the Morlaix factory by Seita (state tobacco company) in its letter claiming responsibility.
A powerful explosive device that was found outside the Chechen Shari'ah Security Ministry in Grozny, was safely defused by authorities.  Officials say that the device was similar to those that were used in two bomb attacks against anti-kidnapping government authorities on 25 and 26 October.  It is believed that this attack is a response to the government's new operation to end kidnapping in the region.
An explosive device blew up at the political offices of PASOK (political party) in Athens.  Minor damages were reported, but there were no injuries.  No further information is provided.
A firebomb was thrown at an Israeli vehicle traveling on the Ramallah bypass highway.  There were no injuries or damage reported.
A fire broke out at the headquarters of the General Association of Korean Residents in Japan (Chongryun) after a Molotov cocktail was thrown at the building.  No one was injured.  A similar attack occurred in Yokohama on this day.  North Koreans living in Japan have reported that they have been targeted since a rocket fired by Pyongyang flew over Japan on 31 August.A similar attack occurred in Yokohama on this day.  It is unclear if they were coordinated.
One person was reportedly killed and four others injured when a powerful car bomb exploded in Red Square in Moscow, only a few yards from the Spasskaya Gate that leads to the Kremlin.  According to reports, one man, Ivan Vasilyevich Orlov, drove the car at high speed into the center of the city, proceeded to Red Square where he jumped from the car moments before it detonated.  The car had been packed with about six kilograms of TNT and the blast could be seen and heard all over the city.  Three soldiers were cut by shards of metal and the perpetrator was also injured from his jump from the car.  Police arrested Orlov, who they claim had left-wing radical propaganda in his possession and who they accuse of fighting against Russia's current regime.  The car was completely destroyed by the blast and the Spasskaya Gate was slightly damaged.
A group of Albanian gunmen fired automatic weapons in the village of Priluzje, about 20 kilometers northwest of Pristina, for about four hours.  Several houses in the village were damaged by the shots but there was no reported injuries.  The attack is being blamed on ethnic Albanian extremists.
Two people were killed and twenty-five injured in a suicide car bomb attack on Jerusalem's main food market Mahane Yehuda. Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility for the attack.
An explosive device made of a camping gas canister was planted near a bank in Legutiano.  Police were able to defuse the device without incident.  No claim of responsibility has been made.
An explosion occurred at the tax office in Matignon.  There was little damage and no injuries.  Note:  The attack was claimed by the Breton Revolutionary Army (ARB) on 31 January.
An explosive device detonated in the front yard of the home of Georgi Shishkov, an MP of the ruling Union of Democratic Forces (SDS) in Svilengrad.  The blast caused the windows of the home to shatter but there were no reported injuries.  Shishkov had served as head of the Svilengrad customs and at one point accused reserve general Lyuben Gotsev and former interior minister secretary Georgi Lambov of involvement in a broken smuggling ring, which had been operating in the area of Novo Selo.  This incident may be due to this accusation and his work on anti-smuggling laws in Bulgaria.
Six perpetrators threw a fire bomb at a police patrol unit in Istanbul Province.  The device failed to reach its target and no damage was caused.  Authorities managed to capture two of the assailants.
Police defused a car bomb that was discovered by the owner on a crowded street in Aden.  The bomb had a large charge of TNT and was defused approximately thirty minutes before it was set to go off.
Eight bombs exploded at bank branches in northern, central and southern Santa Fe de Bogota.  The blasts affected branches of the Gandero Bank and other Colombian credit institutions as well as stores and homes nearby.  The National Liberation Army (ELN) claimed responsibility for this attack which was ...a way of rejecting the economic policies of the government and paramilitary activities.
An explosive device detonated at a police headquarters in the Fatih neighborhood of Istanbul.  The blast caused financial damages to the headquarters and to surrounding buildings.
Unknown assailants fired 7.65-caliber weapons at the residence of the German Ambassador in Brussels.  No one was injured, but damage was done to a neighboring house.  Officials speculate that the incident may be in connection to the case of Kurdish leader Abdullah Ocalan, but no further information is available.
A car bomb exploded near the German Embassy in Sanna, killing a child, an embassy guard, a Yemeni police officer, and wounding four others.  Yemeni officials speculated that the bomb was targeted at the nearby house of Sheikh Mohammed ibn Shajeh of the Waela tribe.
The Popular Liberation Army (EPL) kidnapped a mayor and three soldiers in Santander.  No further information is provided.
A pipe bomb exploded at an office of the Ataturkish Thought Association (ADD) in the city of Yenimahalle.  The windows on the top floors of the building were shattered and a hole was blown in the roof.  Note:  The ADD is a secular political grassroots organization that has been gaining support all over Turkey in recent times.
Members of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) blocked traffic for several hours and set fire to six units of the interregional public transport service in Yarumal.  No further information is provided.  Note:  Incident date is approximate.
A 220-kw high tension pole that is part of the Tirana-Fier line was blown up with an explosive device.  The blast greatly limited the energy supply all over southern Albania.  No further information is provided.
An explosive device detonated in a trash can in the corridor of a Nationalist Movement Party (MHP) building in Derince, in Kocaeli Province.  The blast damaged the building and other nearby buildings.
National Liberation Army (ELN) guerrillas blew up two power pylons in Antioquia Department -- one in San Carlos and one in Grenada.  Electrical Interconnection, Inc. owns these pylons and reported that this was the twenty-fourth attack on their pylons this year.Note:  Incident date is approximate.
Yemeni tribesmen blew up a pipeline in the Maarib province again. The tribemen involved are believed to be members of the Jahm tribe who are trying to pressure the Yemeni government to build power plants and a water distribution system in their region.
A car loaded with 50 kg of dynamite exploded at a building which houses Navy officers, injuring at least nine (one officer and eight civilians).  Authorities claim that two men attacked the guards on duty with gunfire before they activated the explosive via remote control.  This incident could be in retaliation by the Popular Liberation Army (EPL) for capturing the siblings of EPL leader, Hugo Alberto Carvajal Aguilar.
Three Egyptian men were kidnapped from the village of Lipljan by ethnic Albanians as they were returning to their village.  Authorities believe that the abduction was prompted by a protest, in which these three victims took part, outside the OSCE building in Pristina to condemn the killing of six Serbs on 14 December in Pec.  No further information is available.
Zvonko Bojanic, the vice-chairman of the municipal assembly of Kosovo Polje, was found dead in the village of Slatina.  Bojanic was abducted by five masked gunmen who were wearing the uniforms of the Kosovo Liberation Army (UCK).  The body was left on the side of the Pristina-Pec road beaten severely and with a shot in the head.  This incident came only hours after ethnic Albanians vowed revenge for the killing of thirty-six guerrilla fighters in a border clash on 14 December.  Serb authorities call this, one more attack on Serbia.  (Perpetrators were not identified as Albanians).
An explosive attack on the Gendarmerie in Multifao caused damage to cars belonging to members of the brigade.  Note:  On 18 January 1999, the Corsican National Liberation Front-Canal Historique (FLNC-Canal Historique) claimed responsibility for this attack.
A Molotov cocktail was thrown into a branch of the Yapi Kredi Bank in Kartal, in Istanbul Province.  The device started a small fire, which caused some financial damage to the bank.
The Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC) claimed responsibility for an attack on the gendarmerie of Propriano in southern Corsica.  No further information on the attack is available.
A UN Herculese C-130 aircraft was shot down over an area of intense fighting between UNITA and government troops, killing all fourteen on board.  Four Angolans, an Australian, a Bolivian, a Cameroonian, an Egyptian, a Namibian, a Philippine, two Russians, a South African and a Zambian were all killed in the attack.  The National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) has been accused in the incident but denied responsibility for downing the aircraft.  However, the most senior UN official in Angola accused UNITA of specifically targeting the plane.  This comes in the context of increasing tension between the UN observer mission and the UNITA, which has accused the UN of bias in favor of the Angolan government.
Sixteen foreign tourists were kidnapped in southern Yemen in the town of Mawdiyah, including twelve Britons, two Americans, and two Australians. The tourists were taken when their convoy was stopped at a roadblock between Habban and Aden. The British tour guide from Explore Worldwide and a Yemeni guide were allowed to go to report the kidnapping.  A local journalist said that there were eight militants involved in the kidnapping. The militants, believed to be members of the Aden Islamic Army which is affiliated with Osama bin Laden, demanded the release of two of their leaders, including Salah Haidara al-Atwi who was detained as part of a government crackdown on Islamic extremists enforcing strict Islamic rules in Southern Yemen, as a condition for the release of the hostages. Although tribal kidnappings of foreigners are fairly common in Yemen, this was the largest incident ever.  The hostages were held in a remote hideout that was eventually surrounded by Yemeni security forces. After failed attempts at negotiations, the kidnappers killed two British women (Ruth Williamson and Margaret Whitehouse) and a man (Peter Rowe). Yemeni security forces then stormed the building, starting a shoot-out with the gunmen. An American and British tourist (women) were wounded in the attack as well and another British tourist died of wounds in the hospital. Three of the kidnappers were also killed and three arrested, including Abul Hassan al Mihdar. The remainder of the hostages were released.
In the latest in a series of gun attacks all over Kosovo, Hasan Idrizaj, a civilian, was killed by ethnic Albanians.  His body was found on the Pec-Dacani road riddled with bullets.  This attack and the other killings in the are have prompted NATO to consider intervening in order to stabilize the region.
In the early morning hours after New Years Eve, unidentified individuals threw Molotov cocktails into a post office, one of which caught fire and caused material damage.
A second UN-130 was shot down in the area of Huambo.  The plane was carrying four Angolans, a Namibian, two Philippine nationals and a US citizen.  The Angolan government figured The National Union of the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) was responsible for the attack, though the group denies any involvement.  No deaths or injuries were reported.  The most senior UN official in Angola has accused UNITA of specifically targeting UN planes.  This comes in the context of increasing tension between the UN observer mission and UNITA, which has accused the UN of bias in favor of the Angolan government.
A firebomb was thrown at the National Insurance Institute in east Jerusalem.  No one was injured and there was no damage caused.
A bar belonging to Popular Party member, Modesto Fernandez-Toval was set on fire by unknown persons.  Damage was reported to be serious.    No further information available.
Thirty National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) rebels attacked a Land Rover carrying employees from an Australian-owned mining company, killing all four on board.  A Brazilian engineer, Mario Alberto Trepicio, a British project manager, Patrick Bergin and two Angolan security guards were ambushed while traveling between a mine in Tazua and the city of Luzamba.  Spokesmen for the mining company have indicated that UNITA was behind the operation.
Authorities defused thirteen explosive devices that National Liberation Army (ELN) guerrillas placed on a power pylon in Antioquia Department.
A homemade device exploded at the office of the PSE-EE (Socialist Party of the Basque Country) councilor Jose Manuel Ros, causing a fire that was extinguished by the fire department.  Only minimal damage was sustained.
A building housing both a temporary job agency and Popular Party offices was attacked with Molotov cocktails.  The extent of the damage was not reported.  It was not known which of the offices was the target, as both have been targets in the past.
A bomb was discovered at a garage of an import company owned by Panayiotis Oros, a Greek expatriate from South Africa.  The bomb was dismantled by the police.  A similar device exploded on the premises of the same company a year earlier.
Seven people were injured when a Russian-made fragmentation bomb was hurled into a Nationalist Action Party (MHP) election bureau in the Uskudar district of Istanbul.  This premise has been targeted in similar attacks in the past.  The MHP hopes to gain a majority of parliamentary seats in the nation's election to be held in April.
An explosive device detonated on a road opposite a police station in the Kartal district of Istanbul province.  The blast damaged the station and other buildings nearby.  Police officers are often targeted by leftist organizations in Turkey.
An explosive device, consisting of TNT, was discovered on the doorway of the flat of Dashamir Dini, the local leader of the Socialist Party (PS) in Shkoder.  Dini himself managed to render the device harmless.  This is the sixth time explosive devices were left at Socialist leaders' apartments in the city.
A device made of a camping gas cylinder and six small firecrackers partially exploded outside a pharmacy.  Three of the firecrackers and the gas cylinder failed to ignite, thus causing very little damage.  The pharmacy was owned by the daughter of a Popular Party councilor and could be the reason it was targeted.
Two Molotov cocktails were found on the premises of the Yildiz Technical University.  Bomb experts removed the devices and took them away for further investigation.
Eamon Collins, a former Irish Republican Army (IRA) killer who had written an expose book, Killing Rage, was murdered near his home in Newry.  He was stabbed multiple times.  Previous attempts had been made on his life, and his widow believed the murder was carried out by the IRA.  Northern Ireland First Minister David Timble also publicly accused the IRA.  Note:  Forensic evidence later led police to accuse the Provisional IRA (PIRA) of involvement.
A pipe bomb was thrown through the window of a home where a Catholic woman and four children were sleeping.  The Red Hand Defenders, a loyalist group, claimed responsibility for the attack.
Security officers managed to defuse an explosive device, consisting of 5 kg of TNT, in Minutka Square in the center of Grozny.  The explosive had been left in an area where many pedestrians and vehicles pass through and would have caused many casualties and much damage to the square.  No further information is available.
A number of banks were targeted in Molotov cocktail attacks.  Details were unclear, but four or five different bank branches on the same street were said to be targeted.  No further information is provided.
Paddy Fox, a convicted Irish Republican Army (IRA) bomber and vocal opponent of the Good Friday Peace Accords, was abducted from his car outside a hotel in Monaghan.  Fox was forced into a van which sped away.  An abduction attempt had been made on Fox ten days earlier and he claimed he was being targeted by the pro-peace wing of the IRA.  He was released nine hours later, unharmed.
An incendiary device was thrown at the home of a police officer in Uhart-Cize.  The officer is a former air and frontier policeman in the Basque Country.  Minor material damage was caused as a result of the attack.
A container of gasoline was thrown at a courthouse in Gernika and set on fire.  The fire did caused damage to the building, but no injuries were reported.
A bomb planted in a Volga car detonated in the center of Moscow near the Russian Interior Ministry building.  No one was hurt and the only damage caused was to the car in which the device had been planted.  Authorities from the Interior Ministry were able to extinguish the flames before the fire services arrived.
Three Dagestani residents were shot to death in the village of Achikulak and left on the side of the road.  All three had been shot with a pistol and a shotgun.  Authorities are unsure of the motive for the killing but robbery was ruled out as all their possessions were found in the car.  Police detained a person who they suspected of carrying out these killings and the suspect confessed.  The attack almost provoked an outbreak of ethnic tensions in the area.
A bomb was found near the Turkish Embassy in Komotini.  The device exploded as police attempted to defuse it, injuring one officer who was taken to the hospital.  The attack was claimed by the nationalist group Hawks of Thrace.
A time bomb, consisting of about 200 grams of TNT, was found in the center of Sochi and defused before it could cause any damage.  The attempted attack took place on Ostrovskiy Street which has large shops, an estate agent and a large trade gallery on it.  The target and the motive for the attack are unknown.
A bomb exploded at a post office in Aubagne, causing damage to the building but no injuries.  The Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC) later claimed responsibility for the attack.
The Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC) claimed responsibility for an attack on a finance ministry building in Toulon.  The attack occurred sometime between February 6-12th, but no further details are available.Note:  Incident date is approximate.
Molotov cocktails were thrown at the Socialist Party of the Basque Country Center in Leioa.  The devices caused a fire which firemen were able to extinguish, but other residents of the building did have to be temporarily evacuated.  No injuries were reported.
A large remote-controlled explosive device detonated in Urosevac, outside a Jugobanka, the National Library, the City Council and the 17 November public firm, injuring twelve people, two seriously.  Serbian authorities have blamed ethnic Albanians for the attack, while Albanian authorities point a finger at the Serbian government.  The attack comes amid attempted peace talks in Rambouillet to end ethnic violence.
Unknown assailants attempted to set the ATM of a Vakifbank in the Fatih neighborhood of Istanbul on fire.  Police were able to quickly extinguish the flames and only minor damage was caused to the cash machine.
Six car bombs exploded within minutes of each other outside government targets in Tashkent.  Sixteen people were killed and upwards of 128 were injured.  Several bombs exploded in Tashkent's central Mustakillik Square.  At least one bomb went off near the Nodirabegim Theater.  Bombs also exploded outside the Cabinet of Ministers, the National Bank, and the Ministry of Internal Affairs.  Authorities believe that the bombings were carried out in order to assassinate Uzbekistan's President, Islam Karimov.  Karimov was scheduled to take part in a meeting at the Cabinet of Ministers at 11am, minutes after the attack.  In the days after the attack, security officials arrested upwards of thirty individuals suspected of being involved in the bombings.  The government later blamed the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan (IMU), however the group has not issued a claim of responsibility.
Seven Kurdish activists overtook the Kenyan Embassy in Paris and held ten members of the staff hostage.  Police had to surround the building to bring an end to the stand-off.  This is one of many coordinated attacks all over Europe and Turkey on this day to show support and solidarity for Abdullah Ocalan, the head of the PKK who was arrested by Kenyan authorities at the Greek Embassy in Nairobi.  Ocalan is wanted by Turkey on terrorism charges and has been the leader of the PKK since its inception in 1978.  Since then the PKK has fought for Kurdish rights in Turkey and northern Iraq, often times using terror to achieve their goals.  CNN reports that embassies and consulates in twenty-one cities were stormed by Kurds on this date.
A van belonging to a temporary job agency was set on fire.  No further details were available, but this has been a common target for Jarrai, the youth wing of the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA).
A TV booster station was slightly damaged in a fire, possibly started with some incendiary device.  Police could not confirm the weapon used to start the fire.  Authorities blame the attack on the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) or ETA supporters.
A firebomb detonated at the Bet Orot Yeshiva (a Jewish Orthodox Seminary) on the Mound of Olives in Jerusalem.  There was no reported damage and no injuries caused.
A bomb, which was placed next to a parked car outside a grocery store, detonated, shattering the windows of the car and nearby buildings.  It is unclear if the intended target was the car or the shop.
A Molotov cocktail was thrown at a park in Bagcilar Demirkapi.  No further information is available.
Molotov cocktails were thrown at three notary offices in Diyarbakir, causing great damage.  Violence in Turkey has escalated in protest to the capture of Ocalan, the leader of the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK).
In protest to the arrest of Kurdish leader Abdullah Ocalan earlier in the week by Kenyan authorities, Kurdish rebels hurled a firebomb at a Turkish Airlines office in Rome.  A small fire caused minor damage to the airline's office.  Kurdish youths all over Europe demonstrated in more than twenty-one cities in Europe and Turkey to show solidarity for Ocalan on 16 February.
A group of Kurdish youths threw Molotov cocktails and picnic gas bottles at an elementary school in the Guzeltepe area of Umraniye, in Istanbul Province.  The ensuing fire caused major damage to the school.  Kurdish youths called the media and told them that they would continue their violence until Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) leader Abdullah Ocalan's safety was ensured.
A bus and a minibus in Hakarri Province were set on fire by Kurdish youths in protest to the arrest of Abdullah Ocalan, the leader of the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK).  Kurds called local media sources to state that they would continue their spree of violence until Ocalan's safety was ensured.
Petrol bombs were thrown at a lorry in the Zeytinburnu neighborhood of Istanbul.  No further information is provided.  A spree of violence has broken out all over Istanbul since the leader of the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK), Abdullah Ocalan was arrested in Nairobi on 15 February.
A petrol bomb was thrown into a bank branch in Bagcilar, in Istanbul Province.  The fire that started as a result of the blast was extinguished by the fire brigades.
Several bank branches in the Eminonu neighborhood of Istanbul were targeted by petrol bombers.  Financial damages were caused to the banks and to surrounding buildings.
Suspected People's Liberation Army of Kurdistan (ARGK) guerrillas set three cars on fire in the Dortyol district of Hatay Province, and abducted three people from the cars.  The attack is probably a protest action against the arrest of Kurdish leader Abdullah Ocalan on 15 February.  No further information is available.
A bomb, possibly a pipe bomb, was found in the backyard of a house in Belfast and was defused by the British Army.  There were no injuries, although children were playing in the yard at the time the device was thrown.  The Red Hand Defenders later claimed the attack.
Unknown assailants bombed a furniture store that belongs to a relative of Yusuf Kirkpinar, the chairman of the Nationalist Movement Party (MHP)'s Izmir headquarters.  The shop suffered substantial damage.
A car bomb exploded in central Algiers with five bystanders slightly injured in the attack.
Unidentified attackers threw a fire bomb at a pastry shop in the Gaziosmanpasa district of Istanbul.  The device caused a fire that was quickly extinguished.
A group calling itself the Communist Revolutionaries of Europe attacked the Iranian Embassy at the Hague, throwing Molotov cocktails at the building.  One window was broken, and a small fire was started outside the building, but otherwise damage was minimal.  The group claimed to be supporting the combat of the Kurdish people and accused Tehran of massacring Iranian Kurds.
Members of the People's Liberation Army of Kurdistan (ARGK) set up an illegal roadblock near Yukari Sincan village, checked cars and opened fire on three village guards from the Karacocuk family.  One of the village guards was killed in the exchange.
Petrol bombs were thrown at a primary school in the Eminonu neighborhood of Istanbul.  Minor damage was caused to the premises.  No further information is provided.
Molotov cocktails were thrown at a parked bus in Bahcelievler, in Istanbul Province.  Only minor damage to the vehicle was caused.
Dissident loyalists are suspected of planting a bomb found in a tin of chocolates left on the windowsill of a family's home in Coalisland.  The family alerted police to the device and bomb experts defused it without incident.  The device was attached to a can of lighter fuel with a timer set to go off in fifty minutes.
A band of some 150 Hutu Interahamwe rebels attacked three tourist camps in southwestern Uganda, abducting fourteen hostages of which eight were eventually killed.  Diplomatic sources noted that the rebels purposefully targeted Anglo-Saxons, which would seem validated by the fact that all hostages were from Britain, the US, Canada, New Zealand, and Australia, with the exception of one Danish citizen who was also taken.  Those killed included two American citizens, four Britons, and two New Zealanders.  The Interahamwe are composed of remnants of the Hutu militia that targeted the Tutsi minority for genocide in Rwanda.  After the Interahamwe were expelled by the Tutsi army in exile, which received considerable support from Uganda, they moved their base of operations to eastern DRC, where they have since harassed and attempted to destabilize Uganda and the new Rwandan government as well as participating in the DRC conflict.  Much is made of the Interahamwe's displeasure over what they perceive as an American/British preference for Tutsi rule in Rwanda in contrast to France's toleration of the past Hutu government despite their persecution of the Tutsi minority.
A fire bomb was thrown into a service bus in Demetevler, Ankara Province by unknown individuals.  Financial damage was caused to the vehicle and to surrounding buildings.  There were no reported injuries.
A Molotov cocktail was thrown at a private car that was parked in the Beyoglu neighborhood of Istanbul.  No further information is provided.
An explosive device was thrown into a branch office of the Motherland Party (ANAP) in the city of Sarigazi in Istanbul Province.  The device shattered the windows of the building.
A petrol bomb was thrown at a transformer that belongs to Turk Telecom in the southern Adana Province area.  The transformer was set alight and suffered minor damages.
Unknown persons set fire to a PSE-EE (Socialist Party of the Basque Country) councilor's car in Amorebieta.  The fire completely burned out the vehicle and damaged two other cars parked nearby.
Two bombs exploded 30 minutes apart north of the provincial capital, killing two people. The two explosions were timed to maximize casualties. The attack comes just as delegates were to gather in France to resume peace talks.
A service bus that belongs to the Regional Directorate of Rural Services was set on fire in Bursa Province with petrol bombs.  The perpetrators managed to escape after the bombing but left behind pieces of glass and a plastic petrol container.
A Molotov cocktail was thrown at an official vehicle that belongs to the Monopoly administration in Demetlievler, in Ankara Province.  The device burned the wheels of the vehicle.
A petrol bomb was thrown in a window of a home of a mixed family in Larne.  The device ignited the carpet, but no injuries were reported.  The incident is being treated as sectarian by the police.
A bomb attack at a secondary school in the Ain Defla province reportedly killed three and injured twenty-five.  Ain-Defla is 140 km southwest of Algiers and is the site of frequent Armed Islamic Group (GIA) and Salafist Group for Call and Combat (GSPC) operations.
An explosive device consisting of a gas canister, flammable liquid and a firecracker was found at the bar of the local PSE-PSOE (Socialist Party, Basque Branch) offices in Sestao.  The device was deactivated by police.
A rug store in Bahcelievler was damaged after it was attacked with petrol bombs.  No further information is available.
A TNT bar was placed under a car at a shopping mall in the Atakoy neighborhood of Istanbul, where it exploded.  Even though the explosion took place during the busiest hour at the shopping mall, there were no injuries.  Extensive damage was caused to cars parked nearby.  A group calling itself the Nationalist Kurdish Revenge Teams (Milliyetci Kurt Intikam Timi) claimed responsibility for this blast and another at a shopping center in the Bakirkoy neighborhood.  The group stated, No Turk will sleep comfortably from now on in their claim.
A bomb went off in Colombo damaging a power distribution board and disrupting electricity services.  This was one of three bomb attacks in the area on this day that targeted public transportation and utilities.Ref #10957
A People's Liberation Army of Kurdistan (ARGK) suicide bomber attacked the Turkish Intelligence Organization (MIT) in Dahuk, Iraq, killing at least two MIT officials and injuring six others.  The perpetrator reportedly shot four security forces outside the building, forced himself inside where he activated the explosives strapped to his body.  The attack was perpetrated in protest to the arrest of Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) leader Abdullah Ocalan.
A car that was stolen a few days earlier was found in Rome in the Piazza Vittorio with a bomb inside.  The police evacuated the area while the bomb squad worked to defuse it.
A device made out of two jars of flammable liquid and an incendiary mechanism was planted outside the home of the parents of Dimas Samudo, a Socialist Party councilor and candidate for mayor of Bilbao.  The explosion caused minor damage but no injuries.
Unknown individuals threw Molotov cocktails at a car dealership in Bilbao.  Damage was sustained to the building and several vehicles.
A furniture shop belonging to  Popular Party councilor Victorino Fernandez was the target of arson.  His shop has been the target of arson three times previously.
A homemade explosive device was thrown into a caf in Esenyurf, in Istanbul Province.  The bomb failed to detonate because the fuse was not lit.  Bomb experts defused the device without incident.
A bomb exploded at the residence of a Member of Parliament from Sunamganj.  Authorities are unsure if the device was placed in the home or if it was thrown in from the outside.
A car bomb seriously injured Jozo Leutar, a Croat, who is the deputy interior minister of Bosnia. The two people with him in the car were also injured. The device was planted in his car and was made of a landmine. After undergoing surgery to remove a piece of metal from his brain, Letaur later died from his injuries.  The attack led to protests by Bosnian Croats and a boycott by Croat officials of all levels of the government.  Three people were later arrested in connection with the attack.
A Molotov cocktail was thrown from a car at the Democratic Left Party (DSP) election information bureau (city not specified).  The device caused a fire which damaged furniture in the building.
Two attackers threw a petrol bomb at the workplace of a candidate from the Nationalist Movement Party (MHP) for mayor, in the province of Mus.  The device set fire to the building but it was quickly extinguished by the fire brigades.  The two perpetrators were captured by police shortly after the incident.
A rental car was badly damaged by an explosive device planted near its front wheel in the town of Corte on the island of Corsica.  No further detail is given.
A switch box that belongs to Turk Telecom was doused in gasoline and set on fire in Van Province.  The box was severely burned during the blaze.
The tires outside a tire shop in Van city center were set on fire by unknown attackers.  The fire services managed to extinguish the flames before they spread beyond the tires.
A bomb exploded at a post office in Bastia.  No further detail is provided about damages or injuries, but this attack is one of four reported on the island of Corsica on this night.
A potential female suicide bomber was arrested in the village of Hazayi.  The woman, called Jindar, was captured with weapons, hand grenades and drugs that are often used to give suicide bombers courage.  Authorities believe that Jindar was planning to blow herself up in Newroz, but the intended target is unknown.
An explosive device detonated on a water supply pipeline in an unspecified locality in the Herault area.  This is one of three attacks today on utilities in the area.
An explosive device wired to a door was discovered outside the home of a prominent anti-terror campaigner, Vincent McKenna, the spokesman for Families Against Intimidation and Terror (FAIT).  McKenna accused the Irish Republican Army (IRA) of planting the bomb, but no group has claimed responsibility.  Bomb experts were able to safely explode the device.
An unidentified person or group planted three bombs at Citibank branches around Greece.  One in Athens exploded, causing damage but no injuries.  Two others, in Piraeus and Paleo Faliron, were defused before they went off.  An anonymous caller warned of the bombs earlier in the day but did not identify a group as responsible.
An incendiary device exploded at the door of Dimas Sanudo, a socialist party candidate for mayor of Bilbao.  This is the second attack on Sanudo within the month.  The first was on 13 March.
Molotov cocktails were thrown at a Motherland Party (ANAP) election bureau in Istanbul Province.  The devices started a fire that caused material damage and was extinguished by the building's occupants.  Note:  Incident date is approximate.
A bomb exploded in the center of La Paz, near a hotel where Bolivian President Hugo Banzar was presenting a biography to an audience of government ministers, diplomats and guests.  The explosion occurred after several threats were called into the Radisson Hotel and hours after Deputy Interior Minister, Jose Orias informed the press that subversive movements in the country had been eliminated.  No further information is provided.
An explosive device detonated in the toilet on the second floor of a McDonald's fast food restaurant in the Beyazit neighborhood of Istanbul.  There were no reported injuries.Note:  On 9 March, police arrested nine people, that they claim are members of a terrorist organization, in connection with this attack.  The nine were captured together with 9 kg of explosives and were reportedly planning to stage further attacks on election bureaus and offices.
A homemade explosive device was left near a private vehicle in the Bakirkoy neighborhood of Istanbul.  The blast caused financial damage to the vehicle but no injuries.
A device planted at a dwelling in Vitoria, exploded, setting fire to the door.  The extent of the damage was not reported, but there were no injuries, as the building was empty at the time.
The Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) claimed responsibility for a suicide bomb attack in the center of Istanbul, next to a police van that killed the bomber and injured ten others.  The suicide bomber, a 21-year old woman, had the explosions strapped onto her body and detonated herself as police were beginning to become suspicious of her.  The injured include three police officers and seven civilians.  This attack came shortly after PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan issued a peace statement to Turkey from a prison cell, where he has been held since his arrest on 15 February.
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) guerrillas burned fifteen trucks that were transporting equipment and machinery for well-drilling projects from Ecuador to the Colombian Petroleum Enterprise.
Unknown individuals attacked the home of Union of the Navarrese People (UPN) councilor Jose Luis Ruiz Ruiz with petrol bombs.  They caused only minor damage because they did not ignite.
An attempt to blow up a railway station was foiled when the device, found in an abandoned bag, was defused just moments before it was going to explode.  The device was timed to detonate at 7:30, the time when the Sealdeh and Marudhar express trains are scheduled to arrive at the station.  These trains would be carrying thousands of people on their way to visit the Ayodhya on the occasion of the Ram Naumi Hindu festival.
Itar-Tass correspondent Sayed Isayev was kidnapped in the latest of what have been called a spiral of attacks on journalists and journalism. This abduction is one of a series which reveals the general chaos  within the Chechen area and the inability of Russian or Chechen police to maintain order.On June 19, Isayev was released. The details of his release were not made public, but relatives insisted no ransom was paid.
There was a drive-by shooting at a gendarmerie in Ghisonaccia which caused minor damage but no injuries.  The attackers also threw an explosive device into the courtyard of the building, but the device did not explode.  The attackers used a stolen Peugeot, which was found abandoned shortly afterward, and a motorcycle.
A pipe bomb was found in the backyard garden of a Catholic family in Belfast after the Red Hand Defenders issued a warning about the device.  The bomb was safely defused by experts.
Explosive devices were thrown at the True Path Party (DYP) election bureau in Besiri, in Batman Province.  The windows of the building and those of surrounding buildings were shattered by the blast.
The National Liberation Army (ELN) kidnapped Jesus Antonio Pimento, the father of former Cesar Department governor Mauricio Pimento.  After being held for nearly one year, he was released on 1 May 2000 to Red Cross and area officials in Las Mercedes Corregimiento (Norte de Santander Department).Note:  Incident date is approximate.
A time bomb exploded at the Halk Bread Factory in Hakkari Province, shattering the windows of the factory and of surrounding buildings.  The blast occurred late at night and no one was injured.
The ruling PASOK party office in Galatsi was damaged by a makeshift explosive device.  The police suspect that the November 17 group might be be responsible for this attack.
A homemade tubular bomb, which was left at an election office of the Democratic Left Party (DSP) in Umraniye, in Istanbul Province, was safely defused by sappers.  The device had failed to explode because the cigarette that was used to light it had gone out.  The device had been left between the shutters of the window of the building.
El Tiempo reports that Councilman Isidro Villamizar (from Huila Department) was shot twelve times.  No further information is provided.
The 47th Front of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) is presumed responsible for killing the Principal and Coordinator of the Pedro Alejandrino Melchor co-ed School in Caldas Department.  No further information is available.
Unidentified people attempted to blow up a monument in Rumbula which is dedicated to the memory of holocaust victims. The device was placed next to the commemorative stone, but caused minor damage only. Police commented that the attack could have been perpetrated by people hostile to Jewish and Latvian people.
A pipe bomb, which was attached to a timer, was found in a 'suspicious-looking' bag that was left in the restroom of the Haktan Business Center in the Beyoglu neighborhood of Istanbul.  Sappers were called in to the scene and managed to safely explode the device.
Three people were slightly injured in a shooting attack on a minibus that is used for the Democratic Left Party's (DSP) candidate for mayor, Leman Canbol.  An unidentified gunman (or gunmen) fired upon the van in Alasehir, in Manisa Province.  Elections are set to take place all over Turkey on 18 April.
The official vehicle used by Villava's mayor Alfonso Ucar was set on fire.  Ucar is a member of the Union of the Navarrese People (UPN), a regionalist party associated with the Popular Party.
Four people were injured in a bomb attack at a taxi park in Kampala. It was reported that the blast came from the direction of a speeding car.
A car carrying explosives was found by a bomb sniffing police dog near the Marino metro station just before the beginning of a concert planned to mark the opening of the Marinski shopping mall. The car was moved to an empty area behind a police station and the bomb was defused with a special robot by Federal Security Service bomb-disposal experts. No suspects have been identified.
Unknown perpetrators broke into a True Path Party (DYP) office in Kagithane, in Istanbul Province, left a time bomb under a desk and wrote the message. The revolutionaries will be accounted for in spray paint on the wall.  The signature of the note bore the name of the Revolutionary People's Liberation Party-Front (DHKP-C).  Sappers were able to safely defuse the bomb.
Three unknown perpetrators opened fire at a police car in the Eyup neighborhood of Istanbul.  The bullets did not hit the car and no one was injured.  The assailants managed to escape after the incident.
Two unknown gunmen opened fire on a police vehicle in Istanbul Province.  None of the bullets hit the car and no one was injured.  The gunmen escaped when the security forces returned fire.
A rest center used by the air force near Ajaccio's Campo Dell'Oro airport was the target of an explosive attack -- possibly using plastic explosives.  Damage was said to be extensive.  The attack was claimed by the Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC).
A bomb exlploded a branch of the People's Bank, Batticaloa Branch.  The blast blew off the roof and damaged the windows of the premises.  Authorities believe the blast was caused by an IED.
Four policemen were killed when a bomb exploded in Yinchuan, the capital of the Muslim autonomous region of Ningxia in northern China.  While Islamic separatists have carried out attacks in China, no definitive evidence has linked them to this attack.
Three Blockbuster video stores in different areas of Rome were attacked with Molotov cocktails and stones in an apparently coordinated assault.  All three incidents occurred within the space of five minutes.  Only one store was damaged.
A threatening letter attached to a non-functional explosive device was received by police at the Movement for a Democratic Slovakia center based at Tomasikova Street. The system contained a small amount of Semtex explosive.
Four people were killed when masked men riding a Suzuki Khyber car opened indiscriminate fire in the middle of a market, killing a police inspector and three others.
A package containing four hand grenades was found at the entrance gate of a large office building in the Cagaloglu neighborhood of Istanbul.  Security forces were called in and managed to render the devices ineffective.
Three security personnel were killed when a powerful bomb exploded in Assam.  A Border Security Force (BSF) constable was also injured in the blast, which was triggered by a remote-detonated device hidden under a wooden bridge near Hasinapur.  The blast is believed to be the work of the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) or Bodo militants.
An explosive device was set up and exploded at the home of the former Central Bosnian County prefect Ivan Saric. The explosion caused considerable damage.
A small pipe bomb exploded outside a local pub The Ramble Inn in County Antrim.  Several cars parked nearby were damaged by the blast.  The Orange Volunteers claimed the attack.
The 47th Front of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) is presumed responsible for kidnapping a judge and prosecutor at a roadblock between Manizales and Medellin.
A group of unknown perpetrators stopped two vehicles that were traveling from Koyunhisar to Ordu, in Sivas Province, forced the passengers out and killed two and injured one of them.  The assailants managed to escape after the attack.
There was an arson attack on the party offices of the Left Democrats in Rome, causing minor damages to the buildings' shutters.  The arsonists set fire to rags drenched in a flammable liquid and placed on top of an open cooking gas canister.  This was part of a wave of attacks in protest to the NATO campaign in Yugoslavia.
A time bomb was placed under the car of Professor Altan Gulhan Ozerkan, the Dean of Istanbul University Faculty of Dentistry in Bagcilar, in Istanbul Province.  Bomb experts were called to the scene and safely defused the device.  Dr. Ozerkan claims that he has never been threatened in the past.
Several Katyusha rockets were dropped in western Galilee, injuring one person.  No further information is provided.
An explosive charge was found at the Efrat settlement in the Qatif Bloc.  The charge was placed in a pipe planted on the settlement's security road and was intended to detonate if someone passed.  Instead the charge failed and bomb experts safely rendered it ineffective.
The Animal Liberation Front (ALF) claimed responsibility for causing about $150,000 in damages to the offices of the Childers Meat Company, in Eugene, Oregon.  The perpetrators placed buckets of fuel all over the building and set the buckets ablaze.  The fire destroyed the two-story office building, a shipping dock and a refrigeration unit.  The ALF carried out the attack to protest the meat and dairy industry's treatment of cows.  In February of 2006, eleven people were indicted in a series of arson attacks, including this one.  Eight of the suspects were arrested and three remained at large.
A powerful device exploded at a branch of the Banque Populaire near Avignon, damaging the buildings and several cars parked nearby.  The Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC)-Historic Wing later claimed responsibility.
A group of armed assailants attacked the Directorate General of Rural Affairs office in Erzurum Province, killing one guard and wounding four others.  The perpetrators chanted separatist propaganda slogans during the attack.
A Catholic worker was shot twice by suspected loyalist gunmen as he arrived at work, but he survived the attack.  The Ulster Defense Association (UDA) and Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF) have denied involvement although authorities claim the shooting bears the marks of a loyalist paramilitary shooting.
Unknown persons set fire to a policeman's vehicle as it sat parked in a public car park.  The fire also caused damages to two other neighboring vehicles.
Unknown individuals threw a Molotov cocktail at a building housing government tax offices in Athens.  Damage to the entrance was sustained.  No further details are available.
A pipe bomb was thrown into the Esen Caf in Kartal, in Istanbul Province, by unknown individuals.  The blast broke the windows of the caf.
A bomb was hurled at a branch of the Vakifbank in Kartal, in Istanbul Province.  The blast shattered the windows of the bank.
A bomb exploded in a busy quarter of Algiers, wounding seventeen people.
Massimo D'Antona, a former government transport minister and the current advisor to the labor minister, was shot and killed on the streets of Rome by two gunmen.  There were multiple claims of responsibility including the Armed Phalanx although police said they gave that call little credence.  A previously unknown group called the Communist Armed Nuclei from Naples also claimed responsibility.  The Red Brigades also claimed responsibility which claim police were treating as a serious lead, citing opposition to the war in Yugoslavia as part of the motivation as well as recent labor reforms.  On 12 September 1999, the Parliamentary Commission on Massacres concluded that a new cell of the Red Brigades was responsible for this murder.  On 2 April 2003, Nadia Lioce, a member of the Red Brigades was officially charged with the murder of D'Antona.  Lioce was arrested by Italian authorities after a shoot-out on a Rome-Florence train one month earlier.  Police arrested six other Red Brigade members who they believe played a part in this assassination on 24 October 2003.
A bomb exploded at the French Electric Company (EDF) premises in La Ciotat near Marseille, causing some damage.  The Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC)-Historic Wing later claimed responsibility for the attack.
The home of a city council employee and local union representative (General Workers' Confederation) was attacked with an explosive device, causing slight injuries to his son.  Note:  This employee has been targeted three times.
A group of armed perpetrators attacked a chief village guard in his home in eastern Van Province.  One village guard and one assailant were killed and a second village guard was injured.  The perpetrators began their attack with guns and later used an explosive device against their target.  All the assailants, except the one killed, managed to escape into the mountains.
An bomb exploded on the route taken by vehicles carrying Chechen Mufti Akhmad-Khadzhi Kadyrov (Chechen spiritual leader) and his guards. Five of his bodyguards were killed, but he was not wounded. The bomb exploded beneath the guards vehicle rather then beneath that carrying the mufti. This is the fourth attempt on the mufti's life. Theories on this attack centered around the Wahhabites and other rebel groups who desire Kadyrov's death. However, the attack may also have been a statement against coming talks between Russian and Chechen leaders.
Shots were fired at the Kfar Darom settlement in the Gaza Strip.  There were no injuries and no damage caused in the attack.  Israeli soldiers who were at the scene returned fire.
Ekrem Cetin, the mayor of Kilis, was slightly injured in the leg by a single gunman on a motorcycle.  The mayor was sitting on a bench on the side of the road when the man with a handgun shot at him.  Another man, Mehmet Yasar, who was sitting on the bench as well, was also injured by the gunfire.
A bomb exploded in Algiers, with one reported dead and a further five injured. This is the third bomb attack to strike Algiers in the past eleven days.
Four village guards were killed and two others were wounded when they were ambushed by unidentified perpetrators in Hatay Province.  The incident took place in the woods about three kilometers from the village of Azganlik.  The assailants managed to escape after the attack.Note:  Incident date is approximate.
Huseyin Korkulutas, a village guard was killed and another guard, Mehmet Tastekin was injured when a group of gunmen opened fire on them in Icpinar village in Bingol Province.  No further information is available.
Two hand grenades were thrown into a pub in Istanbul Province, injuring a German couple, Patric and Sureyya Klein, who were customers at the pub.  Sureyya Klein is said to be seriously injured.  No further information is available.
Approximately thirty rebels from the Domingo Barrios Front of the National Liberation Army (ELN) -- traveling in three canoes -- intercepted the boats on which thirty-two people were traveling and abducted the men, leaving eighteen women and children abandoned.  Orlando Rodriguez Saavedra, the Barranquilla Councilman, was among the group of abducted men.Note:  On 20 November, El Heraldo reported that to date seven of the kidnapped boaters had been released.
On the same day a letter bomb was sent to the Italian Consulate in Barcelona, another letter bomb was sent to the home of the Italian Vice-Counsul in Burgos.  The Vice-Consul alerted police to the suspicious package which was deactivated.  The device was similar to the one in Barcelona; it contained clothes pins, wires, a battery, screws and explosives.  The police later ruled out any link between the letter bombs and the killing of Italian labor leader Massimo D'Antona last month in Italy.
A hand grenade was thrown into a shop in Istanbul Province by unknown individuals, injuring two people slightly.  The blast caused minor damage to the shop, which was closed at the time of the attack.  A number of people were detained by police following this incident.
A low-power device planted in the men's restroom of the Popular Party (PP) office in Madrid exploded, causing minor damage.  Police suspect the First of October Anti-Fascist Resistance Group (GRAPO) of being involved.
Eight peasants accused of being informers to the Army were shot and killed by Shining Path (SL) members in Azul de Magdalena, a town in the jungle area of Alto Huallaga Valley.
A rocket hit Jalalabad Airport but did not explode.  This was one of multiple rocket attacks that took place in Jalalabad on this evening.Ref# 10940
A bomb was thrown through a window and exploded at the offices of Ettore Muti, a branch of the Italian National Alliance (AN) in Villalba di Guidonia.  Some damage was sustained, but there were no injuries.
An Orange Order Hall was destroyed in a fire apparently set by arsonists.  It was thought the arsonists broke into the hall at Ballywill Row near Castlewellan around midnight.
A tax office in Ajaccio was attacked, causing extensive damage.  There were no injuries.  The Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC)-Historic Wing claimed responsibility for the attack.
Unknown individuals set fire to a radio booster station by dousing it with flammable liquid.  Public and private broadcast services in the area were affected.
A bomb, buried in the sand of a beach near Tipaza, exploded killing a lifeguard.  This type of attack has been used in past years by the Islamic resistance movement which considers some forms of beach recreation as anathema to their code of morality.
Ilyas Akpunar, a private citizen, was shot dead by seven members of the Turkish Communist Party-Marxist Leninists/Turkish Worker Peasant Liberation Army (TKP-ML/TIKKO) in Sivas Province.  Akpunar was shot in the head.
A bomb planted underneath the car of a Swedish journalist for Expo, an anti-Nazi newspaper, was possibly triggered when the car door opened, causing injuries to the journalist and his eight-year-old son.Note:  His family had received numerous threats before the attack.
A bomb attack was carried out at a timber shop in Borgo, causing serious damage.  No other details are available.
The People's Liberation Army of Kurdistan (ARGK) claimed responsibility for an armed attack that took place in the center of Elazig Province.  The target of the attack seems to have been members of the right-wing political party, the Idealist Club.  The Anatolia reports that the shooting took place at a coffee shop, while the ARGK Press Bureau reports it took place at an Idealist Club training building.  Four civilians and two perpetrators were killed in the attack and five others, including a police officer were injured.
Benjamin Smith, a 21-year-old member of the World Church of the Creator (WCOTC), a white supremacy group based in the mid-west, went on a shooting rampage that lasted three days and ended up killing two people and wounding nine others.  Smith shot at a total of thirty-two people in at least seven different communities.  The first shooting took place on July 2 in Chicago, Illinois where Smith shot at fifteen people as they walked from a Jewish Orthodox church.  Later in the day, he shot and killed Ricky Birdson, an African-American man who was walking down the street with his children, in Skokie, Illinois.  On the same day, Smith shot and injured Fu S. Lin, an Asian-American in Northbrook, Illinois.  On July 3, Smith shot at two African-Americans, wounding one in Springfield, Illinois.  Later in the day, Smith wounded another African-American In Decatur and critically injured an Asian student from the University of Illinois.  On July 4, his final day of the shooting spree, Smith shot and killed Won-Joon Yoon, a Korean-American who was standing in front of a Korean Methodist church in Bloomington.  He later hijacked a van, which alerted police and a high-speed chase ensued.  Smith shot and killed himself in the van and was pronounced dead at the hospital.  After police searched his possessions, they found a journal, guns and a bullet-proof vest.  The journal included anti-Semitic, and neo-Nazi writings.
Two Molotov cocktails were thrown at Sehit Ilbey Gulbey Primary School in Adana Province.  Neither device exploded and employees of the school called in experts to rid the premises of the devices.
A man who was carrying several unexploded bombs toward a police station in Batman Province was killed by police forces after he didn't obey the police order to halt.  The unexploded bombs were safely defused by bomb experts.
A time bomb exploded underneath a fuel tanker in Esenler, in Istanbul Province.  There were no reported injuries but financial damages were caused to the tanker and to cars parked nearby.
On July 9, members of a delegation of legitimate authorities of Abkhazia were captured and taken towards the Marukhi mountain pass in a helicopter. Journalists accompanying the delegation were also captured. Those kidnapped include Georgian Health Minister Avandil Dzhorbenadze and a senior Abkhazian judge, Merab Gdeduadze. The hostages totaled over 30. The hostages were later freed as a result of negotiations and in exchange for a meeting between the separatists and the deputy representative of Georgia.
An explosion that rocked a minibus in Istanbul Province seriously injured two people.  Witnesses believe they saw someone board the bus and leave something on board after he/she left.  The bus bomb exploded near a petrol station as it completed its route between Gunesli and Bakirkoy.  This attack is the latest in a series of explosive attacks all over Istanbul since the sentencing of Abdullah Ocalan, the leader of the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK).
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) are presumed responsible for kidnapping Hector Polania, a former governor and former conservative senator.  Authorities later rescued Polania.
Gunmen, reportedly from the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) opened fire on a police station in Agri Province, injuring one officer.  Within 24 hours of the attack, fifteen people were taken into custody related to the shooting, though none of the actual gunmen were captured.
One man was killed and seven people injured when a group of gunmen, suspected Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) members, opened fire at an outdoor restaurant in Caglayan, in Erzincan Province.  This is the latest attack in a series of bombings and gun violence that has taken place all over Turkey since PKK leader Abdullah Ocalan was sentenced to death.
A bomb exploded in al-Kawd, three miles from the city of Zinjibar, on a road leading into the city.  There was no reported damage or casualties.  This is one of two explosive attacks in Zinjibar on this night- the other took place at a courthouse.
A second bomb exploded amid a curious crowd gathering the see the explosion site of a first bomb detonation, under a bridge on the Indo-Bhutan border.  The second blast killed one person and injured about thirteen others.Ref #11005
A live F-1 grenade, ready to explode at slightest touch, was discovered by police in Karachay-Cherkessia. IT had been thrown at the government building in the central square of Cherkessk, where there are always a lot of people. It was removed and brought to the edge of town where it exploded. The latest incident is most likely connected to the general instability in the area which has existed since the May 16 election.
An explosive device, consisting of a camping gas canister, two bottles of flammable liquid, a firecracker and fuse inside a plastic bag, was placed outside the home of Pedro Pedrera, a Popular Party candidate in recent local elections.  A neighbor of Pedrera cut the fuse, which had been lit, before the device could explode.
A bomb exploded in front of the home of Susumu Ishiyama, the Transport Ministry's director general of the Osaka Regional Civil Aviation Bureau. The blast damaged his car and home, but injured no one.  Police suspect that extremists who oppose the expansion of Narita airport are responsible.
After an armed confrontation between United Self Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) and Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) in Valle del Cauca Department, AUC paramilitaries took control of Monteloro, killed two men and set fire to the home of Martha Olaya, a woman accused of aiding the guerrillas.
A group of unknown perpetrators opened fire on a minibus that was carrying village workers in Cigdemli, in Diyarbakir Province, killing six of them and wounding nine others.  The attack comes only hours after Abdullah Ocalan, the leader of the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) called a cease fire on behalf of his group.  Police originally blamed the People's Liberation Army of Kurdistan (ARGK) for this attack but the group adamantly denied all responsibility, stating, This incident is a blatant provocation.  The incident was carried out by profiteers, who do not want the war to stop.
Gunmen opened fire on two settlers driving through downtown Hebron en route to their homes in the small Jewish enclave of Tel Romeida in the heart of a Palestinian neighborhood. The shooting comes at a time of high tension over implementation of the Wye River peace accord. Hamas claimed responsibility.
Eight people were killed and a further eighty-one injured in a bomb attack on a busy market. This violence takes place within the context of Bouteflika's offer of a general amnesty to Islamic militants, which although accepted by many, has also motivated more rejectionist elements to demonstrate their resolve.
A homemade explosive was found hanging over a block of flats inhabited by government personnel and officials. It was defused by police. The explosive device was hung opposite the window of Magomed Magomedov, the former mayor of Makhachkala and the current head of the budget committee of the Dagestan People's Assembly.
A couple of hours after a train was derailed following a blast in Assam, police detected a powerful bomb beneath a bridge near Binji railway station that was set to go off.  The device was defused.Ref #11009
A  bomb went off in Miramshah town just days before President Tarar's August 12th visit, damaging a bridge near the Civil Colony.
A fragmentation pipe bomb exploded in Kayseri Province at a branch office of the Democratic Left Party (DSP).  The blast caused some damage to the office.  Authorities found stickers with the name, Turkish People's Liberation Party-Front (THKP-C) written on them that were dispersed by the explosion.  The pipe bomb was reportedly left by a man in his mid-20's who lit the fuse and then fled the scene.
A bomb went off in Miramshah Tehsil targeted a vocational college causing slight damage.  The blast occurred just days before President Tarar's August 12th visit.
Unknown persons set fire to the law offices of Juan Maria Lopez de Tejada, a lawyer and former socialist activist.  The attackers poured flammable liquid on the doormat and front door and set fire to it.  There was damage caused to the entrance of the building but no injuries.
Six civilians accused of belonging to the Ninth Front of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) were killed by United Self Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) rebels in Antioquia Department.
The Cano Limon-Covenas pipeline was bombed in El Zulia Municipality.  Authorities believe that the explosion is the work of the National Liberation Army (ELN).
A Civil Guard officer on sentry duty at the Astra Arms factory was attacked with petrol bombs.  About twenty of the devices were thrown at his post, one of which hit him, injuring him slightly in the eye.
Unknown persons attacked the courthouse in Amorebieta with petrol bombs which started a fire that was eventually put out by the Vizcaya Province fire brigade.  The flames damaged a vehicle that was parked nearby.
Five policemen were killed and ten wounded when terrorists attacked a police patrol at Pulukuawa, Ampara with small arms.
A bomb exploded near a mausoleum in el Khemis, killing 2 and injuring seven others.  The attack was unclaimed.
The offices of the People's Training Institute was destroyed by a bomb explosion that may have been perpetrated by a group opposing those who work for peace in Colombia.  The attack took place in Medellin (Antioquia Department).  No further information is available.
Two bombs exploded in the residence of Dr. Kodela Sivaprasada, Andhra Pradesh minister for Panchayat raj (local administration).  The blast killed three people and injured four others.
A pipe bomb was pushed through the letterbox of the home of Kevin O'Conner, the brother of Danny O'Conner, a SDLP Northern Ireland Assembly member.  The device exploded, causing serious damage to the hallway but no injuries.  The home of Danny O'Conner had been attacked three days earlier with a petrol bomb.  The family is blaming the Ulster Defense Association (UDA) for both attacks.
Twenty police officers of the Central Reserve Police Force narrowly escaped death after a remote-controlled bomb exploded minutes after a vehicle carrying the men passed the area.  Authorities believe the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) were to blame for the attack.
Four police personnel were killed when a claymore-type bomb exploded at Chettikulam, Medawachchiya on Mannar Road.  Security suspects the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE).
In yet another attack in East Timor, a US worker with the UN was seriously wounded by gunfire. Following the attack he was airlifted out of the city. The UNAMET compound was in a generally unstable position and journalists were attempting to flee the country.
A group of unknown individuals fired four shots at Star Television, a private television company, from a car in Istanbul Province.  Two of the shots were aimed at the third floor of the building.  There were no reported injuries.
Unidentified individuals planted a bomb at the door of a member to the Cherkessk Election Board, Andrei Aleksanov. The explosion destroyed the front door and damaged the elevator. This was one in a series of bomb attacks this evening on the homes of those who support the elected head of the Karachai-Cherkess republic, Vladimir Semyonov.
A homemade explosive device detonated at the former residence of a Popular Party (PP) member in Vitoria.  An 18-year-old woman who was inside the building at the time of the blast, was injured.  The explosion also damaged the entrance and broke windows in the building.
An explosion occurred at an apartment building on Kashirskoye Highway on September 13, the day intended to be a national day of mourning for the victims of the Buinaksk and Moscow bombing over the past few weeks. The explosive used in this attack was found to be almost identical to that used in the Guryanov Street blast. Two more crates of unexploded explosives were found in the rubble of the house, delaying the rescue operation.  There was significant controversy over this latest explosion, as the building had been inspected earlier that day by police officers. 121 people were believed to have been killed in this incident and at least 13 injured.  A person under the fake name of Laytanov [the real Laytanov died earlier in 1999] is believed to have been behind this attack and the one on Guryanov Street, considering that he had rented space in both buildings.  On September 15, this incident, and the others over the past couple of weeks, were claimed by the Dagestan Liberation Army which stated that the attacks were a response to the Russian activities in Dagestan.Note: Number of injuries may have been higher.
Cars owned by the Russian and Albanian Consulates were set on fire with butane gas canisters.  A group calling itself Popular Revolutionary Front (Laiki Epanastatiko Metopo) claimed responsibility for the attack apparently made in protest to the arrival of US officials in Thessaloniki.
The Launay family, including two children were taken hostage by eleven masked, armed commandos.  The family was tied up in a car while their barn was bombed by the perpetrators.  The hostages managed to free themselves and notify the police.  The Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC)-Historic Wing claimed responsibility for the attack, saying that it was committed to warn foreigners that this land will never belong to them.  The Launay family had moved to Corsica from mainland France.
The Armata Corsa claimed responsibility for five coordinated bomb attacks across the island, all directed at Departmental Amenities Directorate (DDE) buildings.  Within thirty minutes, six bomb blasts were reportedly heard, and damage was caused at DDE premises in Ajaccio, Sartene, Porto-Vecchio, Corte and Calvi.  Another device was found two days later, unexploded at a DDE facility in Bastia.  The detonator system on the 20-kilo device had apparently failed to function.  The device consisted of a container of soluble nitrogen fuel oil, with a 400 gram charge of explosive gel and a detonator linked to a slow fuse and stuck to a can.  The Armata Corsa said that the DDE participates directly in ruthless property speculation against Corsicans.
A Dutch journalist was killed by gunmen in military uniforms. The journalist disappeared soon after his arrival in Dili one day earlier. The journalist's body was later found on the outskirts of the East Timorese capital. The body was found with stab wounds in his head and other organs [some sources reported bullet wounds as well]. The incident led to the departure of eighty domestic and foreign journalists from Dili, after Interfet would not guarantee their safety.
Ramiro Alarcon, the mayor of El Playon, was killed along with his government secretary and driver in front of his home by gunmen on a motorcycle.  No further information is provided.
Jorge Veloza Ruiz, a Colombian singer/songwriter, was kidnapped by the Popular Liberation Army (EPL) who claimed that his abduction was for political reasons, not extortion reasons.  No further information provided.
Unknown persons threw a Molotov cocktail at the home of Cristina Munazia, a socialist councilor on the Ibarra town council.  The device hit the front door, causing minor damage but no injuries.
A small explosive charge detonated at the front of an EDF (French Electric Company) office in Propriano, causing minor damage.  The Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC)-Historic Wing later claimed responsibility for this attack in a communiqu in which they denounced the French government's attempts to dispossess Corsicans of their homeland.
A group of unidentified perpetrators hurled fire bombs at a sports club and a coffee shop in Istanbul Province.  Minor financial damage was caused to both the coffee shop and the sports club.  The assailants left behind a banner that read, prisoners are our honor, we won't let them be killed.
A time bomb was found and safely detonated in front of a building that houses the United Press Distribution (BBD) in Bagcilar, in Istanbul Province.
A homemade device exploded at an apartment building where Jose Maria Marco Goni, a UPN (Union of the Navarrese People) councilor lives.  A female neighbor was slightly injured by the blast.  Goni later resigned his post, citing personal reasons but it was thought that this attack was the reason.
Four hooded individuals set fire to a Correos (Spanish post office) van in Elorrio, which was completely burnt out.  No further information is available.
A bank in Port-Vecchio suffered minor damage from an explosion.  The Corsican Patriotic Front (FPC) later claimed responsibility for this and at least four other explosions around southern Corsica that same evening.Note:  The emergence of the FPC comes shortly after a press conference held by the Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC) that rejected a precondition of a renunciation of violence set by French Prime Minister Lionel Jospin one month prior.
The Corsican Patriotic Front (FPC) claimed responsibility for an explosive attack on a holiday home in Bonifacio.  The home was totally destroyed by the ensuing fire and belonged to a mainlander.  The FPC explains that the building of the house in question, in a totally unspoiled area with the backing of local government officials in league with certain shady characters, been the subject of complaints from local people and organizationsNote: The emergence of the FPC comes shortly after a press conference held by the Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC) that rejected a precondition of a renunciation of violence set by French Prime Minister Lionel Jospin one month prior.
Gunmen from the Vigorous Burmese Student Warriors [VBSW]  group who are allied with the God's Army, stormed the Burmese Embassy in Bangkok, taking twenty hostages and making demands. There were thought to be about ten hostage-takers. After entering the embassy, the gunmen forced everyone to lie face down. Although initial reports indicated that the hostages included the Burmese Ambassador to Thailand, later reports stated that he was not inside the embassy. The hostages did include other diplomats, officials, and foreigners, including French, Canadians, at least one German, a Singaporean, and a Malaysian.  The gunmen demanded a meeting with the student leader or chief of the refugee center at Suan Phung village in Rat Buri Province and the Burmese Ambassador. Officials were trying to set up this meeting. The students claimed to be acting in the name of democracy. The hostage-takers also demanded that the junta enter into talks with the opposition National League for Democracy and for the release of all political prisoners. The gunmen released one hostage to reiterate their demand to meet with an exiled leader living in a Thai refugee camp, Aung Soe. Later in the day two other hostages were released.   Thai army commander, Gen. Chettha Thanajaro went to the embassy to negotiate with the armed men.  The day after the gunmen initially seized the embassy, they fled with twenty-three hostages to their headquarters. They left in two vans which drove them to two waiting helicopters in Bangkok. The hostages were released once the helicopters had taken off. A senior Thai official and the Deputy Foreign Minister offered themselves  in exchange for the release of the hostages and flew with the gunmen to the border. No hostages were injured in the incident.  After reaching the border, the gunmen fled into the jungle and were not arrested by Thai officials. Burmese authorities were angered by Thailand's handling of the incident and demanded that the gunmen be arrested.  About one month after their release, several sources reported that the gunmen had announced their willingness to surrender to Thai authorities, in an attempt to avoid being arrested and tried in Burma. However, other sources claimed that the gunmen would not surrender.   In May 2000, an associate of the gunmen who seized the embassy and a founding member of the VBSW, Saw Tin Oo, was sentenced to death in Myanmar court for his involvement.
Four members of an illegal organization threw fire bombs at the Uskudar Headquarters of the Democratic Left Party (DSP) in Istanbul.  The attackers entered the building and rendered ineffective the people inside before throwing the fire bombs and fleeing.  The perpetrators left behind a banner with the name of an illegal organization written on it.  Police exchanged fire with the attackers and two police officers as well as one of the perpetrators were injured.
Two unidentified men threw a petrol bomb into a bank branch in the Zeytinburnu neighborhood of Istanbul.  There were no reported injuries but the blast caused minor physical damage to the bank.
A bomb went off in the residential area of Barrage Colony.  No one was injured but there was slight damage caused by the blast.  This was one of two explosive attacks in the city on this day.
An explosive device detonated in a suburb of Pyatigorsk, in Stavropol Territory. Four men lived in the apartment, all from Dagestan. One died as a result of the blast. Police found two packages of plastic explosives and 10 detonators at the scene. These devices were believed to have belonged to the owners of the apartment, who may also have been involved in illegal activities. In late November, Esmanbit Otemisov turned himself into police and admitted his involvement in the attack. He said that he had been paid by a Chechen field commander to carry out a series of terrorist attacks in Pyatigorsk.
An explosive device detonated on the seventh floor of the Public Works and Settlement Provincial Directorate in the Besiktas neighborhood of Istanbul.  The windows of the building were shattered but no one was injured.Note:  An unidentified member of the Revolutionary Peoples' Liberation Party-Front (DHKP-C) called the Anatolia and claimed responsibility for this blast and another against a government building that injured eight people.
Members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) threw pipe-bombs at Indu Shankar Sugar Factory in Hrioun VDC-2 of Sarlahi.
The wife of Jorge Prieto, the Governor of Casanare Department, was kidnapped by a group of armed men in military uniforms.  Authorities have not determined the perpetrators of this abduction.
Unidentified individuals threw a number of petrol bombs at the Correos (Spanish post office) building in Barakaldo.  The front of the building was damaged as well as two as parked nearby.
Unknown individuals threw incendiary devices at the Iberdrola (electric company) offices in Ordizia.  The devices caused slight damage to the premises.
A government van was damaged when a homemade device, consisting of two aerosol cans, was set on fire next to it.  The door of the vehicle was blackened by the flames.
Two incendiary devices exploded at the home of Jose Luis Ruiz, a Union of the Navarrese People (UPN) councilor on the Villava town council.  No one was injured by the attack, but the faade of the building was blackened and a shutter was broken.  Three devices were planted on the windowsill but only the two exploded.
An explosive device was thrown by unknown perpetrators into the Ihlas House Equipments Shop in the Eyup neighborhood of Istanbul.  The blast caused minor material damage to the shop.
Nine people, including two senior members of UN agencies, were killed when their convoy was attacked 20 km. south of Rutana.   The UNICEF representative in Burundi, Luis Manuel Zuniga, as well as the head of the World Food Program's logistics department were lined up against a wall and shot dead, according to eyewitnesses. Hutu rebels are suspected in the attack, and this is corroborated by survivors' accounts of the incident.  Anger over UN support for the refugee camps, which are considered by some as indistinguishable from the enforced internment of Burundi's Hutu population is one possible motivation advanced by the press.   Others cite the attack as an attempt to motivate Western media coverage of the situation.
Explosive attacks on km 40, 3 and 51 of the Cano Limon-Covenas oil pipeline were attributed to the National Liberation Army (ELN).
Suspected members of the Islamic Great Eastern Raiders' Front (IBDA-C) placed an explosive device in front of a Religious Affairs Foundation bookstore that is located on the first floor of the Cagaloglu Cezer-I Kasim Pasha Mosque in the Eminonu neighborhood of Istanbul.  The blast caused slight damage to the bookstore.  A plate with the IBDA-C initials on it was found at the scene.
In the early morning hours of Election Day in Catalonia, a Molotov cocktail was thrown at a police station in Igualada.  No further details available.
A low-powered bomb attack caused minimal damage to the Haute-Corse Low Rent Housing Office in Bastia.  No one has claimed responsibility, but police believe the attack was political in nature.
A sound bomb exploded in front of an office building that houses branches of the Nationalist Movement Party (MHP), Virtue Party (FP), True Path Party (DYP) and the Great Union Party (BBP) in Umraniye, in Istanbul Province.  The device exploded as party members were holding meetings at the MHP and FP branches.  There were no reported injuries.
A deputy of the Russian legislative assembly and the likely candidate for the post of head of the St. Petersburg legislature, Viktor Novoselov, was killed when his car exploded. His death was believed to have been tied to his political position, his position chairman of St. Petersburg's branch of the Social Democratic Party, and his controversial local reputation.
Ahmet Taner Kislani, a pro-secular columnist for the leftist daily newspaper, Cumhuriyet and a professor of political science was killed in a suburb of Ankara when an explosive device, that was hooked to his car's ignition, detonated when he started the car.  Kislani was one of Turkey's leading secularists and was a member of the parliament from 1977-1980.  The bomb was reportedly a fragmentation bomb equipped with a pressure mechanism.  The Islamic Great East Raiders' Front (IBDA-C) claimed responsibility for the assassination.
The People's Liberation Forces (FPL) claimed responsibility for a car bomb explosion in Medellin.  In a communiqu, the FPL claimed that in some cases their actions were aimed at entities with connections to the paramilitaries or to entities that persecute workers.  No further information is provided.
The Genadero Bank was attacked by the National Liberation Army (ELN) for allegedly financing paramilitaries in Colombia.
Police found a pipe bomb when they stopped a vehicle in Dungannon, just a few hundred yards from the home of Ulster Unionist MP, Ken Maginnis, after observing that the two men inside the car were acting suspicious.  The device, which the police linked to dissident loyalists, was blown up in a controlled explosion by bomb experts.  The two men were arrested, one of whom was a Protestant preacher.  Police also found grenades and a Russian RPG rocket launcher, thought to belong to the Real Irish Republican Army (RIRA).
An anonymous caller claimed responsibility for an arson attack on PSE (Socialist party) councilor, Patxi Elola's workshop in Zarautz.  Details of the attack were not reported.  The caller stated that the attack was in protest to the arrests of two Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) members in France,  the extradition of ETA convict Inaki Bilbao and the hunger strike of the ETA convict Iratxe Sorzabao.
Loyalists are being blamed for an attack on a Catholic family in Bushmills.  Sectarian slogans were spray painted on the walls, several paint bombs were thrown at the house and windows were broken.  The window of their car was also smashed, petrol poured inside and set alight.
Two petrol bombs were thrown at a Popular Party (PP) councilor's home in Fuenterrabia.  The devices failed to ignite and there was no damage or injuries caused as a result.
One unidentified individual placed a homemade concussion grenade on the barbed wire fence outside the newspaper, Aksam in the Zeytinburnu neighborhood of Istanbul.  The device exploded shortly after the perpetrator fled the scene.  A placard left behind was signed by the Turkish Communist Toilers Party-Leninists (TKEP-L).
An explosion at a hotel in Bonifacio blew up the central part of the building.  The hotel had been abandoned by its Italian owners because of earlier attacks.  The Armata Corsa later claimed responsibility.Note:  Corsican nationalist groups often target business and property belonging to outsiders to the island.
A homemade explosive device, consisting of four gas bottles inside a fast food paper bag, was planted outside the political offices of Theodhoros Anagnostopoulous, a New Democracy (ND) member and the former Public Order Minister.  An associate of Anagnostopoulous noticed the suspicious package and notified police, who detonated the device safely.
A parcel bomb was planted on a window ledge at the Cargaix-Plouguer central tax office.  It was discovered by a security officer who notified police of the device.  Bomb disposal experts deactivated it without incident.  The Brittany Liberation Front (FLB) later claimed responsibility.  The Breton Revolutionary Army (ARB) also claimed responsibility for the attack, stating that they wanted to denounce racketeering by the French state in Brittany.  In addition, they stated that our taxes must primarily serve the interests of the people of Brittany.
Unknown persons attacked ATMs belonging to BBV bank and BSCH bank on Hurrinza Street in Berrig, with Molotov cocktails.  Damage was reportedly serious.
Gunmen on a motorbike fired six shots at the Hellenic American Union hall in Athens, shattering windows in the building but causing no injuries.  The attack came less than a week before US President Bill Clinton was scheduled for a trip to Greece.
A low-powered explosive device was planted outside the door of the Departmental Directorate of Infrastructure in Corte.
A bomb attack against a Muslim place of worship in Baleone caused minor damage.  The small explosive device which caused the blast was planted at the front door of the premises.
A pipe bomb was planted on the windowsill of a home where a group of students live in Belfast.  Army experts defused the device without incident.  The attack appeared to be sectarian.
A group of armed Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC)-Historic Wing guerrillas tied up a family of three in their bungalow in Saint-Florent, telling them they were going to lay some explosives on the site.  The family later managed to get free and alert police.  The next morning, four blasts destroyed vacation homes belonging to foreigners and residents of mainland France.
A dynamite attack on the Trans-Ecuadorian oil pipeline in Papallacta was reported by Jorge Paleja Cucalon, the Petroecuador Executive President.
A pipe bomb exploded outside a Catholic family's home in north Belfast, breaking the front window of the home.  No injuries were reported.
A resonant bomb was left, along with a banner, in front of a business center in Istanbul Province.  The device detonated but there was no reported damage or injuries.  The attack was perpetrated in protest to the visit of U.S. President Bill Clinton to Turkey.  The banner left at the scene read, Yankee Clinton Go Home!
Authorities attribute a dynamite attack on the Cano Limon-Covenas oil pipeline near Araquita to the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC).
Members of the group, Friendly Society, threw a petrol bomb at the offices of the Nording American Standard company, a US insurance firm, outside Athens.  Only minor damage was reported.  The Friendly Society claimed responsibility for this attack.
A bar was attacked with incendiary devices by a group of hooded individuals.  The exterior of the bar was damaged in the attack.  Police found remnants of incendiary devices and a container of flammable liquid at the scene.
Six people were killed when a bomb went off in Sootar Market.  It is the first such violence after Nawaz Sharif was deposed October 12.
A makeshift incendiary device, consisting of two gas canisters, exploded and caused a fire which engulfed a car in the Pefki area.  There was also minor damage caused to two vehicles which were parked nearby.
A bomb exploded at the Museum of Liberation in Rome, damaging the door and glass windows of the building.  A group calling itself the Anti-Zionist Movement claimed responsibility for the attack in which no one was injured.
Two ATMs were doused with flammable liquid and set on fire in the early morning hours in Hernani.  One belonged to La Caixa bank and the other to Banco Santander.
An explosive device was discovered at an ANPE office, the state-run employment agency in Rennes, and was safely defused.  The police believe the dynamite used in the device was stolen in September by a suspected Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) commando.  The Breton Revolutionary Army (ARB) later claimed responsibility saying that they wanted to denounce racketeering by the French state in Brittany, and were fighting the impoverishment drive of the state and multinational.  They went on to further condemn the collaboration between the ANPE and temporary employment agencies.Note:  The ANPE is France's government-run job center.  They assist anyone who is legally able to work to find a job.
Jammu and Kashmir police prevented a major explosion when they discovered a bomb about to detonate at the historic Lal Chowk in a valley where several militants, tourists and civilians were killed in the last 24-hours.
Authorities blame the Popular Liberation Army (EPL) for killing a photographer and cameraman from the Oriente Regional Television Channel in El Playon (Santander Department).
An explosive device was planted outside the offices of Alico Insurance on the forth floor of an office building in Athens.  The office is next door to the Interamerican offices, where about twenty people were in a meeting at the time.  Only one man was injured, with burns to his hands and face, but the injuries were not life threatening.  A fire broke out after the explosion, but was quickly extinguished by the fire department.
A group of about fifteen hooded individuals stopped a bus at an intersection in Hernani, broke its windows and were about to throw in Molotov cocktails when police arrived and dispersed them using riot control equipment.  As they fled, the individuals threw the Molotov cocktails at two ATMs, one of which belonged to Bankoa and was totally destroyed.
The National Liberation Army (ELN) are presumed responsible for dynamiting six power pylons in Antioquia Department.  Three of the pylons were part of the Esmeralda-San Carlos line, while the other three were part of the San Carlos-Ancon Sur line.
The National Liberation Army (ELN) claimed responsibility for attacks to the regional labor office near the Miraflores hydroelectric dam in Carolina del Principe Municipality (Antioquia Department).  This attack comes shortly after news that ISA would be sold to foreign investors.
Authorities found and defused two explosives, each containing 30 kg of dynamite, at two energy towers south of Medellin.  No further information is provided.
A bomb placed on a bike exploded near an Italian boutique, injuring several people.
Artem Minasian, 17, armed with two hunting rifles, took a group of students hostage at Yerevan's Pedagogical Institute. He said that two of his associates were on standby to blow up seven buildings in the event of his arrest or death. He said that he was doing this to protest the government's policies and demanded that President Kocharian come negotiate with him personally. However, police were able to disarm him and no hostages were harmed.He was wounded severely when police entered the building to disarm him and died several days later.
On the eve of a meeting between Prime Minister Lionel Jospin and all Corsican representatives, a bomb exploded at the DASS building (local Health and Social Affairs Office) in San Nicolas.  No further details are available.
On the evening before a meeting between Prime Minister Lionel Jospin and Corsican representatives, a powerful bomb exploded at the magistrate's court in Porto-Vecchio, causing serious damage.  A man was arrested in connection with another incident and admitted responsibility for this and two other incidents in Porto-Vecchio that night.  Two other men were also arrested in connection with the incidents.
An unknown assailant made an attack on the life of State Duma Security Committee Chairman Viktor Ilyukhin on December 12. Ilyukhin was not injured the attack. He indicated that the attack was linked to his political actions as he was not involved in finance or business.
The Armando Cacua Guerrero Front of the National Liberation Army (ELN) kidnapped Marco Antonio Garcia, the acting ombudsman of Norte de Santander Department.
A group of unknown persons hurled a soda bottle with flammable liquid and acid at a home belonging to a Basque Nationalist Party member, causing slight damage.
A powerful bomb attached to the carrier of a cycle exploded in Sialkot, killing two people.
Seven civilians from five different peasant areas of Concepcion Municipality were killed by United Self Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) paramilitaries who accused them of collaborating with guerrillas.
A group calling themselves, The Autonomous Decorators claimed responsibility for throwing paint bags at the Thuringian Interior Ministry building.  They said the attack was to protest the arrest of three suspected members of the Revolutionary Cells/Red Zora, and they threatened further purposeful actions against the institutions that support this system.
A large bomb, potentially a landmine, exploded at a beer depot in Zanzibar, injuring no one.  The attack was thought to be the work of Muslims who are offended by the consumption of alcohol, particularly during the holy month of Ramadan. Although no group claimed credit for the attack, bombings of bars and churches have not been an infrequent occurrence in the Zanzibar islands, which are 98% Muslim and popularly oriented towards greater autonomy from the mainland.
On Christmas Eve, three bombs were almost simultaneously activated in Cali and Bogota.  The first two bombs exploded at the Colombian-American Center in Cali.  Three minutes later, the third bomb exploded.  Although no group has been blamed for the attack, the Cali Police Commander has not dismissed the National Liberation Army (ELN) as possible perpetrators of the attacks.
The Ramon Gilberto Barbosa Front of the Popular Liberation Army (EPL) kidnapped Carlos Dobrito, an American painter who they suspected of having ties to the US government.  EPL released Dobrito twenty days later after determining that he was simply an artist.
Unknown persons threw an incendiary device inside the BBV (Banco Bilbao Vizcaya) branch in Elizondo, causing a fire.  The extent of the damage was not reported.
In Jammu, at least one person was killed and another two injured when a bomb exploded in a bus terminal.  Official say the blast took place inside the bus.
Unknown persons threw Molotov cocktails at the Socialist Party center in Durango, causing some damage.  No further details are available.
The Yerevan editorial office of the Russian-language newspaper Novoe Vremya was badly damaged in a fire on December 31. The paper's editor, Ruben Satyan, reported receiving telephone threats prior to the arson attack. Sources reported that the arson attack was intended as a sign of protest of the reprinting in Novoe Vremya of an article from Moscow publication on concerning the murder of Armenian premier Vazgen Sargsian.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) are presumed responsible for dynamiting nine electrical towers in Antioquia Department.
The National Liberation Army (ELN) attacked  the Cano Limon-Covenas oil pipeline with explosives, causing 2,500 barrels of crude oil to spill.
A group of radicals threw thirteen petrol bombs at the front of the Civil Guard barracks in Durango.  None of the bombs exploded, causing no injuries or damages.  Sources report that a box containing carious explosives was also found near the barracks.
A medium-sized explosive device detonated and completely destroyed a general mechanical engineering workshop on the island of Corsica.  There is no indication of who carried out the attack.
At least twenty-two persons were injured when a bomb exploded in the coach of a train at the Old Delhi station.  Authorities detained two people they believe may be connected to the incident.
A homemade explosive device damaged a landing in a block of flats in Berango.  The Basque police report that no public officeholders live in this block of flats, but the Vasco Press is reporting that the target may have been a veteran socialist party activist who was injured in an attack by the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) group in 1994.
The headquarters of the Spanish Socialist Workers' Party (PSOE) in Baranain had several windows broken when it was attacked with stones.  The damage is estimated at 50,000 pesetas.  No further information is provided.
A pipe bomb attached to a parked motorcycle exploded outside of a Cape Town court house, injuring one bystander. The attack coincides with the trial of two PAGAD members who were arrested on possession of explosives/weapons the previous month. Although police refused to speculate on the possible assailants, PAGAD involvement is logically suspected.
A branch of the Lyonnaise des Eaux (water company) in Ustaritz was damaged when attackers forced the door open and threw an incendiary device inside.  Police found a note written on the wall of the office praising the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) and calling for an amnesty for prisoners belonging to ETA.
An explosive device exploded at the headquarters of the official party, the Popular Democracy.  No further details are provided.Note:  This attack occurs at a period when popular uprising is taking place in Ecuador to reject the dollarization process and to demand the resignation of the head of state.
A bomb was found in a housing complex, that houses a number of high level police personnel, and defused.  The device may have been set to go off, and comes a day after the president received a parcel bomb that exploded.
After the truce period which started in September 1998 and which the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) broke in December 1999, the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) reinitiated its attack campaign on 21 January 2000 in Madrid, killing Army Lieutenant Colonel, Pedro Antonio Blanco and injuring at least four others in a car bomb explosion.  A spokesman for the Euskal Herritarrock (EH) -- the platform set up by the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) -- apologized for the death of Blanco but said that the responsibility falls on their perpetrators.  A second explosion followed this one about 45 minutes later.  Note:  On 8 March, ETA claimed responsibility for this attack.  In their communiqu, ETA criticized the Basque Nationalist Party (PNV) and the Eusko Alkartasuna (EA) for having slowed down the peace process.
A bomb attack on the town hall in La Baule damaged the stairs in the building and also the premises of the municipal police, located across from the town hall.Note:  On 3 March, the Breton Revolutionary Army (ARB) claimed responsibility for this attack.
A group of radicals wrecked the kitchen in the home of a couple mistaken for the home of socialist councilor Luis Almansa with Molotov cocktails.  No further information is provided.
An explosive device made of a bottle of flammable liquid and several aerosol cans exploded at a bank in Barakaldo, causing damage to the cash dispenser and the entrance door.
A fire broke out at the train station in the Kadikoy district of Istanbul after assailants threw a fire bomb at it.  No further information is provided.Note:  This is one of three bomb attacks in Kadikoy on this night.
At least two people were killed and seven others were injured in a bomb explosion that took place at a mosque in Qayumbad.  The blast took place during prayers.  The premises was slightly damaged by the attack.
A bomb blast took place in the premises of the city court. The bomb was 200 grams and placed on a motorcycle.  The attack was claimed by the al-Nawaz group, who threatened further similar attacks unless Nawaz Sharif and others were released from police custody.
A group of radicals threw a Molotov cocktail at a bank branch on Begonalde Street in Bilbao.  The bank was damaged by the ensuing fire.
Boris Zhilko, a Russian diplomat, was injured when a bottle containing an incendiary mixture was thrown into the Russian Consular Office in Copenhagen.  The attacker was detained and claimed he attacked the embassy in response to Russia's actions in Chechnya.
Authorities report that Colombian rebels blew up a section of the Transandean oil pipeline in the jungle region of Putumayo.
Three people were injured when a bomb exploded inside a CTB bus bound for Batticola.
An incendiary device exploded at the building inBarriozar where socialist councilor Rafael Pulido lives.  The explosion caused damage to the building but no injuries.Note:  Incident date is approximate.
A bomb killed five people and injured forty-four when it detonated on a moving train.  The bomb was planted on the toilet of a train car.  The blast took place just a few minutes after the Marvi Express left the Hyderabad station.
An explosive device exploded under an oil tank at Mahon's Hotel in Irvinestown after a call was made to authorities warning of the attack.  The called claimed to belong to the Continuity Irish Republican Army (CIRA).  No one was injured in the bomb blast or the fire that followed the blast.  This attack comes as the most recent peace process was facing a crisis when the IRA refused to decommission their weapons.
Three coordinated bombings were carried out in central Dushanbe.  The third bomb exploded near the Palace of Unity and a hotel, close to the Russian embassy.  The others targeted the tax committee building and the central avenue.  No injuries were reported.  The attacks come just weeks before the 27 February parliamentary elections.The attacks occurred on the same day as First Vice Premier Haji Akbar Turajonzoda's motorcade was fired on by armed gunmen.  It is unclear if the bombings and the attempted assassination were coordinated.
An explosion in Khabarovsk destroyed 10 flats and caused a large fire in the building. Twelve people were killed and at least 10 people injured. The explosion is believed to have been caused by a gas leak, which was caused by deliberate damage to the pipe. As a result of this finding, the attack was ruled to have been intentional.
Three small firebombs were thrown at the PASOK (Greek socialist party) offices in the Athens suburb of Anthoupolis.  The windows of the office were broken in the attack.
A pipe bomb exploded in front of the main entrance to Istanbul's Mufti's office, located in the back of Suleymaniye Mosque.  Placards and statements signed by the Islamic Great East Raiders' Front (IBDA-C) were found at the scene.Note:  A mufti is one of Islam's most respected leaders.
Semana reports that the National Liberation Army (ELN) dynamited six energy towers in Antioquia Department.
Orlando Medina Torres, the mayor of Narino municipality, was kidnapped by the National Liberation Army (ELN) at a roadblock on the highway between La Union and Sonson.  He, along with Gloria Patino, the Sonson Prosecutor, was released fifteen days later with an ELN message that they were ending roadblocks in Antioquia.
Five people were killed and seven others injured when a bomb explosion blew up portions of a railway track near Sambha.  The attack took place only minutes before the Jammu Tawi-Sealdah Express Train was due to arrive at the Sambha station.
The Breton Revolutionary Army (ARB) claimed responsibility for an attack on tax offices in Dol.  No further information is provided.
The Popular Party office in the Maritimo district of Valencia was attacked with Molotov cocktails.  Pro-Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) graffiti also was left on the faade of the building.
The Medellin airport runway and other facilities were destroyed with explosives by Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) rebels in Antioquia Department.
A homemade explosive device badly damaged a cash dispenser in the San Adrian quarter of Bilbao.  No further information is provided.
Fernando Buesa, the Secretary General of the socialist PSE-EE party, and his escort were killed when a vehicle exploded on the university campus of Vitoria.  The Euskal Herritarrok (the radical platform set up by the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) political wing) stated that they deeply regretted the deaths but did not condemn them.  Note:  On 8 March, ETA claimed responsibility for this attack and another attack against Lt. Col. Blanco in January.  In their communiqu, ETA accused Buesa of basing the whole of his political career on, hatred and opposition against the Basque people.
A bomb, which exploded in a bank, injured one man in the leg.  The explosion occurred in the Levent neighborhood of Istanbul.
The Anti-Mainstream Self-Determination Faction group claimed responsibility for setting an explosive device outside the offices of the Hellenic Telecommunications Organization (OTE).  The explosion caused only minor damage to the building.  The call of responsibility called this attack a warning strike.
The Revolutionary Cells group claimed responsibility for a bombing at the METKA company which belongs to the mining and metal group Mitilinaios.  The is the organization's tenth attack, the last being on 19 December 1999.
The First of October Anti-Fascist Resistance Group (GRAPO) claimed responsibility for a low-intensity bomb that exploded at the Party of the Socialists of Catalonia headquarters in Barcelona.
There was an attempt on the life of Matori Abdul Djalil, Chairman of the National Awakening Party/People's consultative Assembly Deputy chief. The attack was thought to have been politically motivated and pre-planned. Investigators were continuing to look into the incident.
The Revolutionary Cells claimed responsibility for a time bomb that went off at the AKTOR construction company firm's office in Khalandri.  The blast caused damage to the entrance of the company and to surrounding cars.
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) kidnapped Dario Parra Hernandez, a member of the Libano Municipality Council at a roadblock between Libano and Ibague (Tolima Department).
A firebomb was thrown at the offices of Friends of the Police in the Aegaleo district of Athens.  No further information is provided.
A group of between seventy and eighty people threw stones and blunt objects at an Ertzaintza patrol car in Las Arenas.  One of the officers had to fire a shot in the air to break up the attack.
Antonio Jose Bejarano, the mayor of Ubala (Cundinamarca Department) was kidnapped on the road from Guateque (Boyaca Department) to Macketa (Cundinamarca Department) by the 54th Front of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC).  He was released on 10 May 2000.
Armed youths stormed a Shell gas plant, holding thirty workers and four security personnel hostage, before surrendering to Nigerian armed forces the following day.  The Udu youths were protesting what they perceive as Shell's unwillingness to fairly share the profits/benefits of their oil operations with the local communities. Specifically, the youths were motivated by Shell's alleged refusal to tar area roads.
At least five persons were injured in a bomb blast in Sadra Bazaar.
Pradesh Congress Committee president Chowdhary Mohd Aslam had a narrow escape in an attack by militants, who attacked his house at Surankot.  A group of ten heavily armed people began opening fire with automatic weapons and launched rockets at his house from three directions atop a hill.
The Abu Sayyaf group, made up of Muslim rebels, took forty-three hostages, from the Claret school, and threatened to execute them if their demands were not met. Later that day, three hostages were released, including a pregnant teacher and two of her students. The hostage-takers demanded that a negotiating team be formed, made up of  Robin Padilla, a movie star, Rep.  Abdulgani Salapuddin, a former Muslim rebel, and a former Congressman Candu Muarip. The rebels said they would gradually release hostages as the government met their demands, including those for food.  On March 24, several of ASG member, Janjalani's, relatives were captured by a group who said that they would release the relatives in exchange for the release of the hostages. On March 26, at least eighteen more hostages were freed. However, negotiations had stalled.  Abu Sayyaf members reiterated their threat to kill their remaining hostages if their leader's family members were not freed, claiming that the government was behind their abduction. On March 29, The Manila Times reported that a representative of Abu Sayyaf had contacted a government official with four conditions for the continuation of peace talks. They stated that they would only release their hostages to Governor Wahad Akbar.  The government finally gave into demands that Robin Padilla be the center of the negotiating team. Once the negotiations began, the Abu Sayyaf leaders relayed their demands. First, they wanted the release of three of their Arab brothers jailed in the US and three of their Muslim brothers jailed in Basilan Provincal Jail. Next, they demanded the prohibition and arrest of all foreign ships passing through Basilan waters. The third is a law that would allow Muslim children to practice Islam in schools. These demands were rejected and in response, Abu Sayyaf leaders said they would behead to hostages. Government officials confirmed that a military force was ready to take action if necessary. Foreigners were being advised to avoid the area.  On May 3, four of the hostages were killed in a skirmish with 'rescuing' troops in the region. Among those killed were Claretian priest Fr. Ruel Gallardo.  By May 31, GMA-7 Television reported that only eightFilipino hostages remained in captivity. ASG members said that they would free these hostages if they were allowed to keep their hostages and were freed of all criminal liabilities. These eight were reportedly turned over on June 2.  As part of the negotiations, President Estrada approved the ASG demand that fishing in the Sulu region be controlled.
Fourteen Kenyans were killed when their truck ran over a  landmine while crossing the Kenyan-Ethiopian border near Moyale. Kenyan authorities fingered the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF) in the incident, though it is unclear whether the landmines were actually intended for the Kenyan pastoralists. Though Kenyans have been subject to previous attacks in the area presumably motivated by competition over the region's scarce resources.
A fire was started at the traffic police headquarters in Pamplona by Molotov cocktails.  The fire damaged a computer and other office items.
Over forty Molotov cocktails were thrown at a Civil Guard post in Bilbao by masked individuals.  No officers were injured.
Carlos Herrera, an RNE (Radio Nacional de Espana) journalist was sent a letter bomb which failed to explode.  A spokesman for the political wing of the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) group stated that the media were not neutral players in the development or solution of the Basque conflict.
A time bomb left in the doorway of the Istanbul Pension Fund office was safely defused.  All workers were evacuated from the building when a suspicious suitcase was found at the entrance.  There were no injuries.
The Red Hand Defenders claimed responsibility for placing a pipe bomb in a garden on Gray's Lane in north Belfast.  No further information is available.Note:  Information accessed at http://cain.ulst.ac.uk/othelem/chron/ch00.htm on 31 October 2002.
A bomb attack on a weekly market killed two and injured seven others.
Three civilians were killed near Los Cambulos village (Norte de Santander Department) by United Self Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) members who accused them of helping guerrillas.
A bomb went off in a bus in Kasur injuring six passengers.
Three Molotov cocktails started a fire at a cash dispenser in Irun.  No further details provided.
An explosive device went off 100 meters outside the residence of the Russian government envoy in Gudermes, Chechnya. The blast did not result in any deaths or injuries. Two local residents, out past their  'curfew' were held in connection with the incident.
The National Liberation Army (ELN) destroyed a number of power pylons in Valle del Cauca Department.
The daughter of the police chief in Sigli, Aceh was killed when unidentified rebels attacked the Mutiara police station, throwing grenades which landed instead the compound of the police chief. This is one in a string of attacks on the police in this region. Most sources suggests the attackers are members of the Free Aceh Movement (GAM).
An explosive device exploded outside a Credit Agricole bank branch in Folelli.  No further information is provided.
A bomb attributed to guerrillas exploded at the Cano Limon-Covenas pipeline.  No further information is provided.
An explosive, thought to be the same sort that exploded in Dinan and killed one woman the day before, was found outside a post office in Rennes.  No further information is available.
The National Liberation Army (ELN) kidnapped Jose Apldemar Serna Arbelaez, the mayor of Cocorna.  He was released two weeks later, 6 May 2000, in a mountainous area east of Medellin.  Note:  Incident date is approximate.
Five people were wounded when a grenade was thrown in front of the Allied bank in Jolo town. The attack was believed to have been perpetrated by Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG) in an attempt to divert attention away from the kidnappers and their hostages. Several other bombs exploded nearby at the same time.
The second of three bomb went off in Quetta in the ministerial block of the Civil Secretariat.  Ref# 11091
Unidentified assailants shot a Shia leader of Tehrik-e-Jafria Pakistan (TJP) and his assistant.  The assailents were traveling on a motocycle and opened fire on the two men.
A bomb was discovered and deactivated by experts at the gate of the Kirmizi Church in the Balat neighborhood of Istanbul.  No further information is available.Note:  Incident date is approximate.
A handmade pipe bomb exploded at the Finance Ministry building in the Karakoy neighborhood of Istanbul.  The blast slightly damaged the building.
Authorities claim that John Albeiro Chaverra, the mayor of Vigia del Fuerte, was kidnapped by the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC).  No further information is provided.
A large group of hooded individuals destroyed furniture, game machines and other property of a bar which belongs to the husband of Izaskun Gomez, a Socialist town and provincial councilor.  This attack comes one day after hooded youths stoned this bar in protest to the arrest of twelve youths accused of causing street disturbances.
Paul MacDonald was shot four times as he lay in his bed in Dungannon.  The Irish Republican Army (IRA) is presumed responsible, as they had ordered him out of Northern Ireland in August 1999.  MacDonald had returned only for the birth of his daughter.  After shooting him, the assailants also beat him with a baseball bat and a hammer.  His partner, Yolanda Hamilton was also injured in the attack.
Jose Luis Lopez de la Calle, an El Mundo journalist, was shot to death at the door to his home in Andoain.  The Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) is responsible for the attack which was carried out to ...put on the table the role of the media and certain medial professionals who, in ETA's view, follow a belligerent and manipulative reporting strategy in the conflict between the Greater Basque Country and the State...
An explosive device consisting of two gas bottles, a can of benzene, a piece of cloth soaked in benzene and matches, exploded in Vivliognosia, a nationalist bookstore in Thessaloniki.  The ensuring fire caused $4,000 in damage.  Police believe this shop was a target because of the nationalist material displayed in the window.
A Kosovo Albanian party official, the chairman of the Djakovica municipal committee of the Democratic Reformist Party, Adnan Zerka was shot when his house was attacked. Zerka was a vocal advocate of multiethnic policies and equality. His assassination is believed to have been connected to his position on this matter.
Over twenty people were killed in a suspected Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) bomb attack near a Buddhist temple where people were celebrating Vesak, a Buddhist festival.Most of the vicitms were Sinhalese Buddhists.
Manuel Alvarez Caballero, the mayor of San Antonio (Magdalena Department), was murdered along with his brother in Cerro San Antonio.  While authorities have not blamed the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), preliminary investigations indicate that FARC could have been responsible.
Marlin Maria de la Ossa, a Cordoba University student, was killed on her doorstep by suspected paramilitaries from the Self-Defense Groups of Cordoba and Uraba (ACCU).  She was the fourth student to be killed in the past year.  The students claim they do not know why the ACCU is accusing them of being subversives.
Three Portuguese nationals and an Angolan working for Mota Construction company were kidnapped by the Front for the Liberation of the Cabinda Enclave (FLEC-FAC) forces.  The three Portuguese were identified as; Sergio Alves Fidalgo, Manuel Joaquim da Mota Nunes, and Marco Paulo da Costa Santos, and the Angolan as Jose Futila Kwaba.  The Cabinda separatists demanded the Portuguese government recognize its struggle for autonomy as a precondition for the release of the men.  Negotiations and failed attempts to free the hostages persisted for an entire year before the last hostages were finally released by FLEC-FAC on June 25, 2001.
Molotov cocktails were thrown at a school in Vitoria that belongs to Ramon Rabanere, the chief executive of Alava Provincial Council and president of the Popular Party (PP).  No one was harmed in the attack.
Three homemade bombs were found in churches through the Medan district. Two of the bombs did not explode, but one of them injured dozens of Christians when it exploded in an Indonesian Protestant Church during a Sunday morning service. Investigators were looking into the incident and some sources suggested that the attack had been perpetrated with the intent of creating some kind of religious conflict.
A group of Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) rebels seized the La Salvajina hydroelectric plant in Suarez, leaving the area without power for about ten hours.  No damages were reported to the facility.
The mayor of Taflan township, identified as Ali Ozturk, and his wife were shot dead in their home.  Ozturk was elected mayor in 1999 as a candidate from the True Path Party (DYP).  Four suspects were arrested in connection with the assassinations.
Ten foreign journalists [six Germans, a Frenchman, an Italian, a Dane, and an Australian], were held by Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG) gunmen and were released only after paying a ransom of $25,000. The 10 journalists warned other journalists to stay away from the island. The journalists blamed themselves for the incident, noting that they were wrong to even approach the island.
An explosive device detonated at a home belonging to a Catholic woman and her 20-year-old daughter in Annalong.  Loyalist paramilitaries are being blamed for the attack.
An explosive device detonated at the RCM Church in Tadepalliguden in Andhra Pradesh.  The premises was empty at the time of the blast.  This was the first of four bomb blasts that took place in churches all over India on this day.
Bomb experts were able to deactivate a bomb found at a temporary employment agency in Madrid.  Police were alerted to the bomb by an anonymous telephone call; when they arrived on the scene, they found the device which was made of a timer and two detonators.
Five hooded individuals set fire to the Provincia Stereo station in Sabanalarga.  Provincia Stereo journalists had previously received death threats because of their reports on administrative corruption and other irregularities.  The station was burned down but no injuries were reported.
Sappers defused a time bomb that was found in the toilet of a caf in Kayseri Province.  Police were alerted to the location of the device by an anonymous tip-off.
Antioquia Department Deputy Gueillermo Leon Valencia Cossio, the brother of the government's negotiator in the peace talks with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), was kidnapped from a shopping center in Medellin by the United Self Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC).  One of the paramilitaries and one of Cossio's bodyguards were killed during the incident.  The AUC said the kidnapping was in response to Fabio Valencia's irresponsible attitude during a recent trip to Spain with a FARC leader and because he supported Raul Reyes' efforts in the peace process.  Cossio was released four days later.
Two men were injured in an explosive attack on a private home in a nationalist area of Belfast.  The blast comes only one day after loyalist paramilitaries threatened to end their ceasefire if attacks on Protestant homes were not stopped.
The Human Rights Headquarters in Jakarta was attacked by members of the Front for Defender of Islam (FPI). The attack was carried out by about 300 FPI members, and was intended as a protest over a report by the commission's investigation team into the alleged mass killing and burial in the 1984 Tanjung Priok shootings. The attackers used stones and rattan sticks, shattering windows. Members of the Human Rights Commission condemned the violence.
Six bomb blasts occurred within minutes of each other in the southern Philippines city of General Santos, killing one person and injuring at least 36 others. The Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) denied involvement in the attack. However, the fact that they did claim responsibility for attacks in this city in May, aroused suspicion upon them regardless.  The first of these six blasts occurred in a marketplace.
Six bomb blasts occurred within minutes of each other in the southern Philippines city of General Santos, killing one person and injuring at least thirty-six others. The Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) denied involvement in the attack. However, the fact that they did claim responsibility for attacks in this city in May, aroused suspicion upon them regardless. The fifth blast occurred in a hotel.
The Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC) claimed responsibility for planting a bomb outside the Kleber International Conference Center in Paris.  In their communiqu, the FLNC states:  our intervention was motivated by the way the French State is procrastinating while at the same time pursuing and intensifying a police of eradication of our community.
A pipe bomb exploded outside the office of Venezuelan Petroleum, Inc. in Caracas, destroying a news stand.  There were no reported injuries.
An explosive device detonated either on or near the railroad tracks of the main Belfast-Dublin line, three miles outside Newry.  The railway train was halted for the day as authorities examined the damaged track.  The attack is being blamed on dissident republicans who are opposed to the peace process in Northern Ireland.
The Animal Liberation Front (ALF) claimed responsibility for starting a fire that caused $100,000 in damages to a chicken farm in North Vernon, Indiana.  The perpetrators set fire to a truck and empty trailer that were backed up to the feed mill at the farm, which stores food for the chickens at the farm.  Authorities found slogans like, Polluter, animal exploiter, your turn to pay and the initials ALF spray painted at the scene.  The group claimed responsibility for the incident in a fax sent to news personnel a few days after the attack.
A small explosive device, filled with National Liberation Army (ELN) pamphlets, exploded in Bello.  No further information is available.
A fire bomb was hurled at the Turkish consulate on the Greek island of Rhodes.  The bomb caused only minor damage to the building.
Two fire bombs were found on the windowsill of the office of the Italian Confederation of Trade Unions (CISL).  The Revolutionary Proletarian Nucleus claimed responsibility and said the CISL office was targeted for signing a deal with local employers allowing easier hire and fire norms.
An explosive device made of wires, a timepiece and a tin full of liquid was safely detonated by police after it was discovered at the office of La Razon newspaper.  The package had been addressed to journalists at the paper.  This is one of three explosives mailed in Madrid on this day.
A limpet bomb, which was placed under the car of the daughter of a local businessman, failed to explode in Guipuzcoa Province.  The device was made of over a kilo of explosives and comes on the same day a bomb exploded at the Vitoria offices of El Correo.  A later report says that this car belonged to Juan Bautista Rubio Beloki, a local restaurant owner.
Three French journalists were abducted by Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG) rebels while covering the 12 week hostage crisis. After two months, two of the hostages, Jean-Jacques Le Garrec and Roland Madura escaped from their captors and arrived in Manila. They claimed that the pressure put on Abu Sayyaf by foreign governments gave them the opportunity to escape.
A time bomb caused minor material damage when it exploded on the first floor of Ceylan Holding headquarters in Istanbul.  The blast also broke the windows of a nearby bus stop.
The Latvian consulate in St. Petersburg was damaged when it was hit by a rock and a Molotov cocktail, resulting in damage to the faade and the window. About $3,300 of damage was caused. There have been two similar attacks in recent months. The Latvian consulate general expected the Russian government to pay for the damages and also to provide security for the building.
A bomb attack targeted the vehicle in which Shamsullo Jobirov, Deputy Security Minister and a candidate for the national parliament, and Makmadsaid Ubaydullayev, mayor of Dushanbe, were traveling after a government meeting in the capital.  Jobirov was killed and Ubaydullayev was injured.  News sources reported that the attack was an assassination attempt on the mayor.  In March, Tajikistan's special services arrested five individuals suspected of being involved in the assassination attempt.
Fifteen individuals stopped a public bus in Kagithane in Istanbul Province, forced the driver and passengers off and set fire to it with a fire bomb.  The bus suffered major damage.  Police found the name of an illegal extreme leftist organization written at the site.
A pharmacy belonging to Raul Guerra Garrido was set on fire and burned out for the third time in a year and a half.  Garrido belongs to Ermua Forum, an anti-Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) group.  He plans to shut down his pharmacy after this attack.
A branch of the BBVA bank in Basauri was the target of a Molotov cocktail attack.  One woman was reported injured in the attack, and residents of the area were evacuated from their homes.
A bomb blast went off in Quetta at the Jinnah market cantonment area.  The blast killed six people and injured twenty-two others.
A camping gas canister exploded at a branch of the BBVA bank in Vitoria, causing extensive damage to the ATM and the entrance door.
The Pro-Guevara Revolutionary Army (ERG) claimed responsibility for kidnapping a French volunteer from Doctors without Borders.  The group claimed the kidnapping was intended to raise the interational community's awareness of human rights violations in Colombia.  They demanded the demilitarization of three municipalities as a condition of his release.
Muslim gunmen, who were believed to be linked to Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG) and to be close to its leader Raddulan Sahiron, kidnapped ABS-CBN cameraman Percival Cuenca and his wife Maan Macapagal, a researcher. The two were kidnapped after meeting with Abu Sayyaf leaders in an attempt to cover the continuing hostage crisis. The kidnappers threatened to kill the TV crewman and his wife if the ransom was not paid. However, they were later freed without ransom.
Three petrol bombs were found and defused by experts in a car belonging to the father of a policewoman in Anglet.  Police suspect the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) to be responsible for the attempted murders.
Three construction workers, all Christians, were abducted when hauling gravel and sand for a local construction company in Patikul. The men were almost killed when they could not raise the ransom demanded by their captors. They were reportedly made to dig their own graves, and were only saved through the intervention of the mayor of Patikul town in Sulu.
An unidentified armed group kidnapped Guillermo Correa Ortiz from the Catholic Archbishopric of Cali.  The 66-year-old priest was taken from a farm in Gigante (Huila Department).Note:  Incident date is approximate.
Jean-Michel Rossi, a former leader of the Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC), and his bodyguard were killed while sitting in a caf in Ile Rousse.  Witnesses report up to five gunmen were involved.  One other patron of the caf was injured.
A group of hooded individuals boarded a bus in San Sebastian, ordered the passengers off and set fire to the bus.  The vehicle was completely destroyed.  Several houses in the area had to be evacuated as a result of the fire.
A group of youths set fire to a bus in Vitoria that was parked outside a Basque-language school.  There is no further information available.
The National Liberation Army (ELN) staged two roadblocks in the Bolivar and Sucre Departments, burning thirteen vehicles in total.  The roadblocks are in protest to the upcoming visit of US President, Bill Clinton.
Four cash dispensers were set on fire in the Vizcaya Province.  No further information is provided.
An incendiary device was used to start a fire at a Caixa (savings bank) on Don Tello Street in Elorrio.  Residents of surrounding buildings were evacuated while authorities extinguished the fire which caused extensive damage.
An explosive device detonated at the private home of a Civil Guard in Vitoria.  No further information is provided.
A branch of the BBK bank in Bilbao was sabotaged, damaging the cash dispenser.  No further information is available.
An Orange Hall in Carnlough was extensively damaged by a fire that authorities are calling arson.  This attack is one of many on this night that are being called sectarian.
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) guerrillas kidnapped former Valez mayor Hernando Roa Ordila.  He was released 26 October 2000.  No further information is available.
The Navarre Savings Bank in the Chantrea district of Pamplona was attacked with incendiary devices.  The ensuing fire damaged the main door and the ATM.
National Liberation Army (ELN) and Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) guerrillas destroyed two power pylons with explosives at the San Bernardino substation, cutting off power to the Narino and Putumayo Departments for more than thirty hours.  The National Police Explosives Squad had defused two dynamite charges on another pylon in the same sector earlier that day.
A bomb went of in Lucknow near the state assembly building.  Seven people were taken into police custody in connection with this attack.
An explosive device detonated on a windowsill of the Corsican Environment Office, a Ministry of the Corsican Territorial Community in Corte.  This site has been the target of other attacks and is the third against a public building since 28 July when the Prime Minister proposed his vision of the future of Corsica.
A fireworks bomb exploded at the home of Juan Manuel Jaio, the chairman of the municipal branch of the Eusko Alkartasuna (EA) party in Bermeo.  The blast caused substantial damage to the home and to two cars parked nearby.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) claimed responsibility for the destruction of two ATMs in southern Cali, saying the attacks were carried out in protest to the upcoming visit of US President Bill Clinton to Colombia.
Two Civil Guards were killed when a limpet bomb exploded in their patrol car outside the Civil Guard barracks in Sallent de Gallego.Note:  The Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) group later claimed responsibility for this attack.
The social security offices in Durango were set on fire by unknown individuals.  A family who live above the office were evacuated while the fire service extinguished the flames.
Kasim Demir, a Republican People's Party (CHP) provincial organization member and former chairman of the Pir Sultan Abdal Association, was shot four times and killed at his office in Bodrum.  The single gunman was able to escape from the scene.
A metro worker spotted an explosive device on a seat on a metro train after getting on at the Chacaito station.  The train was stopped at the Chaca station and metro personnel evacuated the station until security personnel could retrieve the device, which was reportedly similar to a homemade pipe bomb that was found two days earlier elsewhere in Caracas.
The National Liberation Army (ELN)'s Heroes of Singagua Front claimed responsibility for dynamiting an oil pipeline in El Carrizal (Ricaurte Department) in southern Pasto.  Note:  Incident date is approximate.
The body of Jose Aquiles Rodriguez, the mayor of Ocana (Norte de Santander Department), was found in the rural area of the municipality.  Rodriguez had been kidnapped two months earlier by Popular Liberation Army (EPL) guerrillas.  Note:  Incident date is approximate.
Experts defused a resonant bomb that had been hung, along with a banner with the slogan of an illegal leftist group written on it, on the wall of a bank in Istanbul's Bakirkoy neighborhood.
A low-powered bomb was found and defused near the House of Justice in Cartagena on the day that US President Bill Clinton was scheduled to visit the building.  Police suspect the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) is responsible and that the device was supposed to spread pamphlets against Clinton when it exploded.Note:  On 15 March 2001, two members of the FARC were arrested and accused of plotting to carry out this attack against Bill Clinton.  The two men arrested were in possession of dynamite and planned to carry out an escalation of attacks against banks in Cartagena.
The Hulu Sungai Tengah's district head's office was consumed by fire, only thirty minutes after two other public buildings in the village [the Regional People's Representative Council building and the Public works Office] were also burnt on fire.  The fire was proceeded by an explosion. At least one person was killed in the incident.
A bomb exploded in a crowded bus station.  The blast took place on a bus bound for Faisalabad.  Three people were killed and several others wounded.
The group Black Star has claimed responsibility for setting the car of a Greek-American pensioner on fire in the Athens suburb of Palaio Faliro.
The Black Star anarchist group claimed responsibility for setting Alexandros Mallias' car on fire in the Athens suburb of Halandri.  Mallias is the Greek Ambassador to Tirana.  The Black Star group has claimed three such attacks in this week.  The group says it wants to free a fellow anarchist from prison.
A group of unknown persons set fire to a car belonging to a relative of an Ertzaintza member.  The perpetrators sprinkled flammable liquid on the car before setting it ablaze and throwing Molotov cocktails at it.
The Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) group is responsible for a bomb that exploded at a nightclub belonging to Narciso Korta, the brother of Jose Korta who was killed by ETA on 8 August.  The explosion took place at a time when the nightclub was empty, thus no one was hurt.  The roof of the premises collapsed as a result of the blast.Note:  On 22 September, ETA officially claimed responsibility for this attack saying that they considered the discotheque a center of drug trafficking and said it, ...hurts Basque youth and goes against the process of  liberating the Basque Country.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) killed four Indians in Tutunendo (Choco Department), who they accused of cooperating with paramilitary groups.
Turkish Communist Party/Marxist Leninist Turkish Worker Peasant Liberation Army (TKPML-TIKKO) members stopped three cars that were going to Sahinler village, forced their passengers out and set fire to the vehicles.  The perpetrators escaped after the attack.
A bomb planted at the entrance of an ABS-CN radio station exploded, causing some damage, but no fatalities. The bomb was homemade and is believed to have been planted by the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF). This incident is believed to be tied to another bomb attack in the same city, the same night, in front of a commercial shop.
A Palestinian youth stabbed a Jewish woman in East Jerusalem's Neve Ya'agov neighborhood, injuring her.
A group of unknown individuals threw several Molotov cocktails and a container of gunpowder onto the balcony of a home of a Popular Party (PP) councilor in Durango.  The balcony was completely destroyed, and residents of the building were evacuated for a short time.
A Palestinian youth stabbed a Jewish man in East Jerusalem's Neve Ya'agov neighborhood, injuring him.
A self-defense group attacked Wido in the Tierralta (Cordoba Department) jurisdiction and killed three Indians who they accused of helping guerrillas.
Dissident republicans -- namely the Real Irish Republican Army (RIRA) -- are being blamed for firing a missile at the M16 (foreign intelligence service) headquarters in London.  The group is being blamed because they are known to have acquired these types of missiles from Yugoslavia and because they have also targeted other London locations in attacks in recent months (The Hammersmith Bridge and the Ealing Railway line).  The RIRA are opposed to the peace process in Northern Ireland.  The blast caused some damage but no casualties.
Jose Luis Ruiz Casado, a Popular Party (PP) councilor, was shot and killed in the Sant Adria de Besos area of Barcelona.  Casado was one of three PP councilors on the Barcelona Council.  He was shot as he left his home.  The attackers fled in a Renault car which police later found burned out, a tactic of covering up evidence typically used by the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA).
Three unidentified men took four hostages and kept them in a hotel room, hands tied, with a grenade and a can of petrol in the room. They demanded the release of all Chechen prisoners held by Russians, a helicopter, and 30 million USD. After negotiations, the kidnappers released a female  hostage, and then surrender themselves to authorities. The men were arrested.
Unknown persons threw a grenade at a Barrancabermeja public establishment on Circunvalar Avenue, killing one person and injuring four others.
National Liberation Army (ELN) guerrillas dynamited the Cano Limon-Covenas oil pipeline between Arauca and the Gulf of Morrosquillo, forcing the pumping activities to be suspended.  More than 5,000 barrels of oil were spilled.
The National Liberation Army (ELN) kidnapped Alejardro Matos Castro, a soon-to-be ordained Jesuit priest, while he was trying to negotiate the liberation of Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) captives.  He was release on 1 October in a mountainous zone in Bolivar Department.
Two explosives were left near a police headquarters in Istanbul's Kadikoy district.  One of the bombs detonated and the other was defused by experts at the scene of the first blast.
Members of the First of October Anti-Fascist Group (GRAPO) left an explosive device in the offices of El Mundo newspaper in Catalonia.  The device exploded in a trash can.
Explosions rocked two government buildings in the capital city of Aceh, but caused no casualties. The two attacks are were believed to be perpetrated by the same group with the intention of stirring up problems or disturbing public peace.  The first one occurred at the office of the Justice and Human Rights Ministry.  Police found ten meters of wire at the scene of the second explosion.
The Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) made two attempts on the life of Sri Lankan Muslim leader, MLAM Hizbullah.  The first of these attacks took place north of Batticaloa, when attackers opened fire on his convoy.  The vehicle that was carrying Hizbullah was bulletproof, and thus he was uninjured.
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) rebels kidnapped ten people in Santander including; Jose Gregorio Plata, mayor of Matanza and Orlando Lizcano, mayor of Surata, as well as six candidates for public office.  They were kidnapped in order to be used for interrogation about their campaign platforms.  The attack took place on the highway between Matanza and Bucaramanga.
An Israeli was shot and killed on the West Bank's Trans-Samaria Highway.  He had been on his way to a garage between the villages of Biddiya and Mashah.
A low-powered bomb exploded in a neighborhood in Cartagena, injuring a woman and a child.  Urban guerrillas are suspected of involvement in the attack.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC)'s Jacobo Arenas cell claimed responsibility for killing seven peasants and setting forty homes on fire in Ortega, saying paramilitary groups operate in that area and they are trying to destroy them.
The Herriko Taverna in Bilbao's Uribarri area was set on fire by unknown individuals who sprinkled gasoline on the building before setting it on fire.
Freddy Acosta Gonzalez, a mayoral candidate in the Bolivar Department, and his father Agustin Acosta, were kidnapped by eight men carrying rifles and wearing military uniforms.  The kidnapping occurred in Yucal, a rural area of Calamar.
Settlers from Kinyat Arba attacked a bus belonging to the Bani Na'im Bus Company on the main road between Hebron and the village.  Four bullets entered the body of the bus but no injuries were reported.
Shots were fired at Israeli cars near the settlement of Betar Ilit.  No injuries were reported.
Tunja Torres Navarrete, Peasant Integration Foundation Party candidate for mayor in Sogamoso, was shot to death by unknown persons.  No further information is available.
Settlers fired on houses in the Palestinian village Hosan, west of Bethlehem, causing damage but no injuries.
Bomb disposal experts were able to defuse a powerful explosive device that was left outside the offices of Stavros Soumakis, the PASOK Merchant Marine Minister in Piraeus.  A member of the Revolutionary Nuclei called in a warning of the bomb to privately owned Flash radio.  The attack comes a month after an Express Samina ferry sunk off the coast of Greece, killing eighty people.
A bomb went off in Cali outside a rehabilitation center in the Obrero neighborhood.  Two children were killed and thirty other injured.
A bomb activated by remote control was discovered on the Kissufim road and was safely defused.
A passerby was injured when a medium-powered bomb exploded at a bank branch of La Caixa in Barcelona.  The explosion damaged the bank and several floors of the building in which it is housed.
An explosion at the Banco Atlantico on San Agustin Street (city unknown) caused a fire which damaged the cash dispenser at the bank's entrance.
Two explosions were reported at health institutions in Ciudad Kennedy, southeastern Bogota.  No injuries were reported but some material damage was caused.  No further information is available.
A group of unknown individuals attacked a branch of the La Caixa bank in Gallarta.  No further information is available.
The United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) claimed responsibility for kidnapping congresswoman Zulema Jattin Corrales as she was heading from Sahagun (Cordoba Department) to Monteria with her father, former senator Jose Jattin Baffer.  He was released but Jattin Corrales was detained by the rebels.
Prison officer Maximo Casado died when a bomb exploded in his car.  The bomb was detonated when Casado started the ignition in his garage in Vitoria.  EFE states that this attack was perpetrated by the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA).
A dynamite explosion damaged seven houses in Huaroz province.  Police suspect the Shining Path (SL) is responsible.  There were no reported injuries.
Senator Antonio Guerra de la Espriella and chamber representatives Luis Felipe Villegas and Anibal Monterrosa were kidnapped in the Sucre Department.  They were reportedly held by armed men at a Santa Isabel farm in Tulo.  These two senators and five other parliamentarians were held by the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) for a little over two weeks.
A fragmentation bomb was thrown at Bayrampasa Prison.  It was thrown over the prison wall to one of the towers.  When experts were defusing the device they found it to be an American-made fragmentation bomb.
A pipe bomb exploded in a Burger King fast food restaurant in the Fatih neighborhood of Istanbul.  The attack caused minor damage to the restaurant but no reported injuries.
Police found and defused a grenade in the middle of a street in the Fatih neighborhood of Istanbul.  No further information is available.
A settler opened fire on Palestinians in front of Augusta Victoria hospital in East Jerusalem.  One man, a hospital guard, was injured.
The National Insurance Institutes East Jerusalem branch was attacked by Palestinian militants. The militants approached the reception desk at the Institute and fired at the guards. Eish-Kodesh Gilmor, a security guard at the Institute, was killed by gunmen and his fellow guard, Itai Suissa was critically wounded. In response to the attack, the National Insurance Institute decided to close the East Jerusalem branch. No one claimed responsibility for the attack.
An incendiary device detonated at a branch of La Caixa savings bank in the Gracia district of Barcelona.  Minor damage was caused to the bank.
Palestinians fired shots at Pesagot.  No one was hurt.
Shots were fired at Moshav Nizzane Oz inside the Green Line from the vicinity of Tulkarm.  No injuries were reported.
Shots were fired at Bet Hefer from the vicinity of Tulkarm.  No injuries were reported.
Shots were fired at an Israeli car near Ma'ale Efrayim, injuring one person.
The United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) launched an attack on two towns in the Antioquia Department, killing at least nineteen people, including a farmer, two drivers, a plumber and several ice cream parlor workers.  An eyewitness said that most of the victims were accused by the AUC of cooperating with guerrillas in the region.
The brother of Paramo (Santander Department) mayor, Mario Hernandez Pereria, was kidnapped by the National Liberation Army (ELN) guerrillas of the Efrain Pabon Front, who stopped his truck and forced him into another vehicle.
Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG) abducted a public school teacher and two of her children in Basilan, but then released them twelve days later after the government issued an ultimatum: either they could free the hostages or face large scale military assault.
Unknown individuals lit at least one can of petrol on fire at a branch of La Caixa in Onati.  Residents of homes nearby the bank had to be evacuated as a result of the fire.  The interior of the bank suffered some damage.
Settlers shot at a Palestinian residential area in Hawara. No injuries were reported.
An explosive device detonated at a building in Vitoria where a member of the National Police lives.  The explosion caused no injuries and no serious damage.
An explosive charge was detonated near the walls of Jerusalem's Old City, injuring a policeman.
Palestinians fired on the southern Mount Hebron settlement of Otni'el.  No one was hurt.
Unknown individuals sprinkled flammable liquid on a travel agency in Lekeitio and set it on fire.  The fire damaged the walls and fittings of the office.
The Revolutionary Cells group claimed responsibility for a bomb attack on a sculpture workshop in Athens.  The workshop is owned by a Greek-American who had once sculpted a statue for the US Embassy in Athens.  The attack caused material damage.
Palestinian gunmen fired at Jerusalem's Gilo neighborhood.  No injuries were reported.
Shots were fired at vehicles traveling near Otzrim in the West Bank.  No injuries were reported.
An Israeli was killed when his car was shot at the Kissufim junction.
A powerful explosion destroyed three warehouses and injured three people in Villavicencio.  The owner of one of the warehouses said he had not received any threats.  The damage could exceed over one billion pesos.
Shots were fired at an Israeli vehicle near the village of Huwareh.  No one was hurt.
A guerrilla group gave an indigent man a package that, unbeknownst to him, was filled with explosives.  The package exploded as he walked through the banking sector of Cali, killing him and wounding four others.  The package reportedly contained 500 grams of ammonium nitrate fuel oil.
Palestinians fired at Hebron's Tall al-Rumaydah enclave.  No one was hurt.
A man carrying bombs in his hands was killed by police as he attempted to bomb the Sehit Ismail Akkoyun Police Station in Istanbul.  After he was shot, one of the fragmentation bombs that he had been carrying exploded and injured a child who was passing by at the time.
A homemade explosive detonated under the private car of an Ertzaintza member in Vergara.  The car was totally destroyed and two others parked nearby were damaged.  The device was made of a petrol can and a camping gas cylinder.
Three firebombs were thrown at cars traveling on the Ma'ale Adumim road from the East Jerusalem village of Issawiyah.  No one was hurt.
A self-defense group in Norte de Santander Department killed patient Diomedis Amaya Santiago on his way to the Tibu hospital in an ambulance.  The group has targeted the hospital because they accuse the personnel of collaborating with guerrillas.
The Departmental Directorate of Infrastructure (DDE) building in Corte was damaged extensively when a car bomb exploded outside the building.  Police blame one of the Corsican underground groups.
Palestinians fired at the settlement of Psagot from Ramallah.  No one was hurt.
Settlers from Kari Shabon shot and injured a Palestinian in the Qalqilyah area.
Ernest Lluch, a former socialist minister, was shot and killed by members of the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA).  Lluch was shot to death in the parking garage of his building.  Shortly after the shooting, a car bomb exploded in the outskirts of the city.  Typically ETA will blow up a getaway car after an attack like this.Note:  On 15 January 2001, ETA justified this murder by saying that Lluch backed closer ties between the PSOE (Spanish Socialist Workers' Party ) and the PNV (Basque Nationalist Party) in order to draw the latter into firm collaboration with the state.
Shots were fired from Tulkarm into Nizzane Oz.  No one was hurt.
Shots were fired at the settlement of Bet El.  No one was hurt.
Authorities discovered three TNT demolition blocks, an electric detonator, and a timer, packed in polyethylene and secured to the base of a railroad tank car.  The device was found and defused at the Naushki station on the Mongolian border only six hours before it was to explode.  Investigators stated that the bomb left on the train from Irkutsk when Russian President Vladimir Putin was on an official visit to Mongolia.  The train arrived in Naushki six days later after being delayed for several days in Ulan-Ude.  Note, the incident date is the date the event was reported.
A settler from Humash opened fire in the Palestinian village of Selit al-Daher near Jenin, wounding four.  The settler had warned the villagers of an impending attack the day before.
Two unknown individuals threw a petrol bomb at the cash dispenser of the Garanti Bankasi bank in Umraniye in Istanbul Province.  Minor damage to the ATM was caused by the blast.
Three firebombs were thrown at Israeli cars near the village of al-Awja on the Jordan Valley highway.  There were an unspecified number of casualties.
November's Children claimed responsibility for an explosive blast that damaged the offices of Liana Kanelli, a correspondent for the magazine Nemesis and a Greek Communist Party (KKE) deputy.  Kanelli has received death threats in the past.  The communiqu issued by the November's Children stated, we attacked the nationalistic magazine Nemesis which is housed in the same area with the political office of Liana Kanelli's restraining party of Greece.
Shots were fired at Rachel's Tomb in Hebron.  No one was hurt.
A bus belonging to Bizkaibus public transport in Barakaldo was completely burned out by unknown arsonists.
Shots were fired at houses of settlers in Hebron.  No one was hurt.
A device consisting of about one kilo of explosive that was packed inside a lunch box detonated at the Guema factory in Bacaicoa.  Guema manufactures cranes.  A hole was blown in the front wall of the building.
Police found and defused a device which may have contained the commercial explosive Semtex under a car in the town of Drumshane.  Authorities do not know why this car was targeted.  The Irish Republican Army (IRA), who often uses Semtex in their devices, was blamed for this attempted attack.
Rigoberto Casto Mora, the mayor of Unquia (Choco Department), was kidnapped with two bodyguards in Palo Blanco by armed men from the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC).  The bodyguards were later released, but the mayor's dead body was found by police two days later.
Shots were fired from Beit Jala at Jerusalem's Gilo neighborhood, injuring one.
Settlers fired at the Palestinian checkpoint close to the bypass road leading to the settlement of Kedumim.  No injuries were reported.
Two people were injured when Yahia al-Shami suddenly began firing at people after prayers at the Grand Mosque. He was also found to be carrying a hand grenade which was taken away from him before he could throw it.
A car containing two explosive charges was discovered and defused outside the 55th Military Division of Ajaccio.  Police were tipped off by an anonymous phone call, and found the device parked in the building's garage.Note:  On 20 December, the Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC) claimed responsibility for this attack stating, despite the ceasefire, we reserve the right to strike every time the National movement is attacked.
A pipe bomb was thrown through the window of a Protestant home in Larne as part of a spate of sectarian pipe bomb attacks all around the area.  Bomb experts were able to make the bomb safe and no one was injured.
An Israeli bus came under fire near the Ramallah district village of Silwad.  No one was hurt.
Shots were fired at the settlement of Neve Tzuf.  No one was hurt.
National Liberation Army (ELN) rebels from the Manuel Hernandez El Boche Front kidnapped eight officials of the Technical Investigation Corps (CTI) of the Choco Prosecutor's Office in the village of Mungurri on the road to Medellin.  The officials were there to investigate a murder allegedly committed by the insurgents.
Shots were fired at an Egged bus south of Hebron.  No one was hurt.
The Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) blew up a Colombo-bound civilian passenger bus coming from Batticola.  The attack killed three people and injured twenty-three others.
A pipe bomb was thrown at the front of a Catholic home at Ferryguay Place in Coleraine.  The residents, a 76-year-old woman and her son, were not injured and no damage was caused to the house.  A sectarian motive has not been ruled out.
Three Israelis were wounded in a shooting attack on the Trans-Samaria Highway near Shavey Shomron.  Palestinian gunmen fired from a parked car and then fled to the nearby village of Burqa.
A pipe bomb was thrown against the back window of a Catholic home in Millburn Estate in Coleraine.  The device bounced off the window and exploded in the back garden.  This attack and other pipe bomb attacks in this area may have been carried out to raise sectarian tensions.
Three people were killed and 30 injured when two car bombs exploded near a market in Pyatigorsk. Forty-eight buildings were also damaged in the blast. Officials stated that the bombs exploded at the same time and yielded 15-20 kilos in terms of TNT. Investigators stated that they saw a 'Chechen trace' in the attacks.  The first bomb exploded in a truck, killing one, injuring at least five and damaging two apartment blocks.  Five suspects were arrested in the attack.
A car-bomb explosion in the Chechen village of Alkhan-Yurt killed 21 people and injured 30. Most of the victims were under 21 years old. According to AFP and the population of the town Chechen, and not Russian forces, planted the mine. However, Chechen forces claimed they had nothing to do with the incident. Four people were detained in the blast.
A bomb exploded at the ATM of a bank in the Besiktas neighborhood of Istanbul.  The blast caused financial damage.
Police are blaming animal rights activists for a powerful explosive that detonated near the home of a man who works for an electrical firm.  Authorities say that this company has attracted the attention of animal rights activists recently and believe this man to be the intended target.  No one was injured by the blast.
Suspected Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) rebels fired an 81mm mortar on a relay base of the city's leading Catholic radio station, DXMS, which is critical of MILF. The mortar blast was apparently aimed at the transmission tower, but instead hit a makeshift warehouse about 10 m away. The day before the attack, one of the radio station's technicians received a call warning them of a bomb attack if they continued airing the nightly program Radio Kalimundan which is critical of the MILF. This is the second assault on the station in only six days. The MILF denied involvement. However, even after three months of investigation, military sources still reported that MILF was responsible.
An Israeli was injured when shots were fired on his car near Beqa'ot junction in the Jordan Riff Valley.
Palestinians in Beit Jala fired on Jerusalem's Gilo neighborhood.  No injuries were reported.
Shots were fired at an Israeli car near the Ramallah district village of Turmus Ayya.  No one was hurt.
Two policemen and two civilians were killed when a bomb exploded in the eastern Batticaloa area.
The National Federation of Workers at the Service of the State (FENALTRASE) leader Wilson Borja was seriously wounded by five gunmen as he was leaving his home in Bogota.  One of the gunmen was killed, as well as a woman on the street, presumably because she was an eyewitness.  Borja was a member of the commission negotiating with the National Liberation Army (ELN).  Carlos Castano of the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) later claimed responsibility for the incident but insisted they were merely trying to detain Borja, not kill him.
A bomb went off in Arbil's Mustawfi district near a communication tower.  No one was hurt and no damage was caused.
A second parcel bomb was found at the Chamartin railway post office in Madrid and deactivated by police.  This package, containing the same fifty grams of gunpowder as one found earlier, was addressed to Agustin Yanel, a journalist for the newspaper, El Mundo.  Authorities believe the bombs to have been sent by anarchists who are showing solidarity with common prisoners.
A third parcel bomb was deactivated by bomb experts at the post office at the Chamartin railway station in Madrid.  This package, addressed to Alfredo Semprun, a journalist at La Razon daily newspaper, contained about fifty grams of gunpowder, like the two found at the same post office the day before.
A one kilogram device was found on the roof of Milan's famous Cathedral.  It was found around noon with a time set to explode at 3:00pm.  Police were able to defuse the device.  The International Solidarity group, who attempted to explode a device in Milan's St. Ambrose Basilica in June 2000, claimed responsibility for this attack.  In their claim, the group expressed sympathy for prisoners on hunger strikes in Spanish jails.  They also called for the abolition of harsh jail conditions and for the release from jail of the terminally sick.
On his way back from covering a story in Tumaco, Narino Caracol correspondent and journalist Wiston Viracacha, along with his cameraman and assistant, were intercepted by National Liberation Army (ELN) rebels from the Comuneros del Sur Front.  His two companions were let go but Viracacha was held until 26 December.  The ELN accused him of making false reports and released him with a message from the guerrillas.
Shots were fired at Kefar Darom settlement in the Gaza Strip.  No one was hurt.
One person was killed and three injured when two gunmen opened fire on the Zeytinburnu branch of the Idealist Hearths, an ultra right-wing nationalist group.Note:  The Leninist Guerrillas Troops of the Turkish Communist Labor Party/Leninists (TKEP/L) claimed responsibility for the attack as their answer to the military operation against the revolutionary prisoners in Turkey.  They also stated, Take up arms against Fascism.  The communiqu with the claim of responsibility is posted on the Arm the Spirit website http://burn.ucsd.edu/~ats
Paramilitary fighters killed eight members of two families in San Pedro who they accused of having ties to rebel groups in the area.
Shots were fired at an Israeli car near the settlement of Eyal from the direction of Qalqilyah.  No one was hurt.
A bomb exploded at the Rome offices of the daily newspaper, Il Manifesto.  The blast damaged the building and seriously injured Andrea Insabato, the man suspected of planting the device.  Insabato is an extreme rightist and a former member of the neo-fascist terror group, Armed Revolutionary Nuclei (NAR).
Shots were fired at Mahane Bezeq in the West Bank.  No one was hurt.
In a series of attacks, Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) rebels destroyed four power pylons in Yarumal (Antioquia Department), cutting power from the San Carlos Cerromatoso Uno distribution line to the Atlantic Coast.Note:  Incident date is approximate.
An unidentified group of people stormed the Red Fort, killing three people with firearms.  According to police the Pakistani Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) was responsible.  The Red Fort is a national landmark and a symbol of Indian independence.
A bomb planted in a trash can in Istanbul Province's Bagcilar district was detonated by remote control as a police officer approached it.  The officer, Ibrahim Artay, was injured by the blast.
A pipe bomb exploded in Netanya in an attack police said was apparently aimed at derailing the peace process.
A priest was injured when a bomb, planted in a Christmas parcel, exploded at his home. Later, police found three similar bombs also wrapped as Christmas parcels at another priest's home and at two other Protestant churches in Pematang Siantar. This incident follows the rash of bombs on Christmas Eve which left many dead. Police detained two people for questioning. They were arrested while entering a housing complex with Christmas parcels.
A bomb placed in a pushcart injured twenty-five people.  No further information is provided.
Two Palestinians were injured by shots fired at their car near Ari'el.
A group of about one hundred National Liberation Army (ELN) guerrillas set up a roadblock in Bosconia (Cesar Department) and abducted seven people, including the mayor of Granada (Magdalena Department).
A group of radicals set fire to a car belonging to an Ertzaintza member in Renteria.  Residents of the area had to evacuated while the fire was extinguished.
The Earth Liberation Front (ELF) claimed responsibility for planting a small incendiary device at homes in the Island Estates Development in Mount Sinai, New York.  The blast caused a fire, which caused about $30,000 in damages to three different homes.  The Island Estates Development is being built on one of Long Island's last remaining peach farms.  Authorities found graffiti written at the scene that read, if you build it, we will burn it.  The ELF stated, this hopefully provided a firm message that we will not tolerate the destruction of our island.  In May 2004, Connor Cash, a member of the ELF, was arrested and charged with aiding in this attack.  Cash denied all responsibility.
Ten minutes after an explosion at a Nissan dealership in San Sebastian, and only 300 meters away, a second explosive detonated at the Construcciones Suquia building.  A caller from the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) warned of both devices about twenty minutes prior to this blast, which caused much damage.
Slight damage was caused when a homemade device exploded at the entrance to a Telefonica Company offices in Plentzia.
A wave of six blasts in the Philippine capital of Manila left a total of twenty-two people dead and about 100 injured.  All the blasts used ammonium nitrate. Investigators suspected that the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) was responsible for the attack, and even arrested some suspects. However, the MILF denied involvement and instead blamed Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG) for the attacks. An alternate theory claimed that Abu Sayyaf had indeed perpetrated the bombings and would continue to commit such acts until their leaders were released. A final theory blamed members of the police and Philippine's Senate for the attacks. However, in May of 2003, a detailed terrorist Saifulla Unos involved in MILF and with links to al-Qa'ida admitted to leading the attacks in Manila in 2000.  The first blast occurred in a coach at an overhead railway station north of Manila, killing twenty-two people and wounding about forty-seven others, two of which died in the hospital from their injuries.  In July 2003, Philippines indicted Hambil and seven others for the bombing. One of the suspects, Saifullah Yunos, pleaded guilty to helping plan and execute the attack.  On 2 August, two men were arrested and implicated in connection with all of these bombings.  These men, Mamasao Naga and Abdul Pata have ties to the Jemaah Islamiah (JI) terrorist group.
A wave of six blasts in the Philippine capital of Manila left a total of twenty-two people dead and about 100 injured.  All the blasts used ammonium nitrate. Investigators suspected that the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) was responsible for the attack, and even arrested some suspects. However, the MILF denied involvement and instead blamed the Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG) for the attacks. An alternate theory claimed that Abu Sayyaf had indeed perpetrated the bombings and would continue to commit such acts until their leaders were released. A final theory blamed members of the police and Philippine's Senate for the attacks. However, in May of 2003,  a detailed terrorist Saifulla Unos  involved in MILF and with links to al-Qa'ida admitted to leading the attacks in Manila in 2000.  The next explosion occurred in the financial district of Makati, across the street from a hotel in an empty gas station. The bomb had been planted next to the hotel, but was found by some children and carried across the street. The policemen who arrived to defuse the bomb were killed when it exploded in the process.  On 2 August, two men were arrested and implicated in connection with all of these bombings.  These men, Mamasao Naga and Abdul Pata have ties to the Jemaah Islamiah (JI) terrorist group.
An explosive charge, made of 20 kg of nitrate-fuel mix, exploded in Corte at the Corsican Environment Agency.  This is the fourth time an administrative office under the local territorial administration has been targeted.
Palestinians fired at the houses of Jewish settlers in Hebron.  No one was hurt.
A bomb was left in a package outside a shopping plaza in Istanbul's Fatih neighborhood.  Police were able to defuse the homemade pipe bomb without incident.
The central zone of Iurreta was left without power for three hours after an attack on the Iberdrola (energy company) electricity substation.  No further information is available.
Ten people were injured by a bomb blast that took place among a New Years celebration in Taksim Square.  The governor of Istanbul said that the attack aimed to destroy the Turkish state and rule of law in this country.  The blast comes four days after violence began in Turkish prisons in protest to the new F-type prisons.
Palestinians fired shots at the settlement of Netzarim.  No injuries were reported.
An explosive device made up of twenty-five liters of petrol, a timer, wiring and a firing mechanism was found after it failed to explode near a booster station in Soraluze.  This Karakate booster station books television and telephone signals all over the region.
Shots were fired at an Israeli bus in Ma'ale Levona in the West Bank.  No one was hurt.
The National Liberation Army (ELN) is blamed for a bomb attack on the Cano-Limon pipeline in Arauca Department.  No further information is provided.
An explosive device, made up of a gas cylinder and a fuse, exploded near the home of a retired police officer in the northern Basque region.  The blast caused minor damage and one person was treated for shock.  According to some sources, the retired officer was also the father of a member of the Alava Provincial Council.
Five rockets were fired at the general command of the Internal Security Forces in northern Tehran.  Several people were either killed or injured.  The Iraq-based Mujahideen-I-Khalq (MKO) claimed the attack.
Bomb disposal experts carried out a controlled explosion of a device found in a flowerpot near the grave of former Popular Party (PP) councilor, Jose Ignacio Iruretagoyena.  Members of the PP and family members of Iruetagoyena had gathered at the grave to pay homage to the deceased.  Sources attribute the attempted attack to the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) group.
At least thirty people were injured in a powerful blast at the main gate of the Telecommunications Department.  A large number of people were gathered outside of the building to pay telephone bills.
A pipe bomb, which had been left in the rear garden of a home in Kilrea, was found by a 16-year-old boy who carried it inside the house.  A telephone warning the previous day had brought the police to the house but they found nothing in their search.  No one was injured by the device.
Bomb experts deactivated a time-bomb that was found at the ATM of a Garanti Bank in the Sisli neighborhood of Istanbul.  No further information is provided.
As part of a series of pipe bomb attacks, an explosive device was thrown at a house in the Ballee area of Ballymena.  The device was similar to others found in recent days and is being labeled as sectarian.
A handmade pipe bomb with a timing device exploded under a Jeep, damaging it and two other vehicles parked nearby.Note:  Incident date approximate.
An explosive blast occurred at the Association of Judicial Commissioners office in Thessaloniki.  The front office was destroyed by the attack.
The Earth Liberation Front (ELF) claimed responsibility for setting two vehicles, owned by Melo's Construction Company, on fire in Long Island, New York.  The perpetrators doused a pickup truck and a front-end loader with gasoline and then set them ablaze.  The group accused the construction firm of raping the earth.  In their statement, the ELF writes, all businesses, large or small, which participate in earth-raping industries, will continue to be targeted as a part of the ELF's ongoing campaign to evoke economic damage on those responsible for urban sprawl.
Shots were fired at Jerusalem's Neve Ya'agov neighborhood from the direction of Dahiyat al-Barid near Ramallah.  No one was hurt.
The Ulster Defense Association (UDA) is being blamed for a pipe bomb that was found at the rear of a house belonging to the brother of a Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) chief constable.  The house was unoccupied at the time of the attack.
Two explosive devices were set off on the Netzarim road.  No one was hurt.
The general coordinator of the Palestinian Broadcasting Corporation (PBC) was shot dead in Gaza as he left a hotel.  The al-Fatah linked al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades claimed the attack, citing Hisham Makki's corruption.
Police defused a bomb made of four bottles of petrol and two camping gas canisters that was found at the Renfe train station in Barakaldo.
Bomb disposal experts defused a pipe time-bomb that was found placed in front of the Eminonu municipality building.
Police were able to defuse a car bomb that contained 110 pounds of dynamite in the wealthy Neguri neighborhood of Getxo, where many politicians and businessmen live.  This is the third explosive device to be planted in this area since 3 December 1999.  A caller speaking on behalf of the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) warned of the device prior to its discovery.
A group calling itself the Chukakuha Revolutionary Army claimed responsibility for bombing the home of an executive of the Narita airport authority.  The explosion destroyed a car and damaged the garage and another vehicle.  No injuries were reported.  Extremists groups have targeted airport officials in protest of the expansion of Narita airport.
Two Israeli were killed in the Tulkarm area.  They went to Tulkarm in the company of an Israeli Arab and were subsequently kidnapped and executed.  The two were from central Israel.  The military wing of Hamas, the al-Qassem Brigades, claimed the attack.
The Latin American Patriotic Army (EPLA), a splinter group from Colombian guerrilla groups, kidnapped Tachira rancher Franchesco Palapiano (originally from Italy).  He was freed 19 April without having paid any ransom.
Loyalists, specifically the Ulster Defense Association (UDA), are being blamed for planting an explosive device under the car of a Catholic man in north Belfast.  The man was driving the car out of his driveway when a black box fell from underneath it.  Experts carried out a controlled explosion of the device.
A pipe bomb was found on the roof of a car on Carnany Drive in Ballymoney, which is in the same neighborhood where three brothers were killed by a loyalist petrol bomb two and a half years earlier.  Police believe this latest attack to be sectarian.
A powerful bomb killed two people as the state celebrated first Republic Day.  The explosion occurred in a Uttaranchal roadways bus coming from Delhi.  Most of the passengers had departed from the bus moments before the blast occurred.  India has blamed the attack on Pakistan.
Loyalists are being blamed for planting a pipe bomb in the garden of a home in north Belfast.  Security forces were able to neutralize the device.
A pipe bomb was thrown through the window of a home of a Catholic family in Coleraine.  The device did not explode and was taken care of by bomb disposal experts.  Police are treating the attack as sectarian.
Shots were fired at an Israeli bus on the Ramallah bypass road.  No one was hurt.
Palestinians fired a mortar at Netzarim.  No one was hurt.  This is the first time Palestinians have used a ballistic missile against a settlement.
Eleven dynamite attacks were carried out on the Cano Limon-Covenas pipeline over two days.  The first attack occurred at Km 52 in the Arauquita jurisdiction on 31 January 2001.  The other attacks were carried out between 1-2 February 2001 from Km 43 to Km 84 near Toledo (Norte de Santander Department).
A pipe bomb exploded on the windowsill of a Catholic home in Ballynahinch.  The blast damaged the house and is being blamed on loyalists, more specifically the Ulster Defense Association (UDA).
Loyalists are being blamed for throwing a pipe bomb at the Whitecliff Inn pub in Whitehead.  The device hit the front of the pub but failed to detonate.  Bomb experts were called in to defuse the device.  Loyalist are being accused of raising sectarian tensions all over the area by attacking Catholic targets.
A pipe bomb was thrown through the window of the home of a north Belfast family.  No one was harmed but the blast caused severe fire damage.
Shots were fired at an Israeli car near Bet El.  No one was hurt but damage was caused.
A pipe bomb was found unexploded at the home of a Catholic family in the Ardoyne area of north Belfast.  The home is situated in a heavily republican area of the city.
No one was injured when a bomb, packed with nails, exploded outside the home of Barry Bradbury in Lurgan.  Bradbury is an outspoken critic of the Loyalist Volunteer Force (LVF).
A pipe bomb partially exploded at the home of a Catholic family in Londonderry.  Minor damage was caused to the home but no one was injured.  Loyalists are being blamed for perpetrating the attack.
Palestinians fired shots at the settlement of Pesagor.  No one was injured in the attack.
A homemade device, made of a large firework taped with nails, was thrown at a Catholic house in Dungannon.  The blast damaged a car parked nearby and shattered a garage window.
A nail bomb exploded at a Pensioner's dwelling in east Belfast.  No one was injured in this attack which comes during a spate of sectarian violence throughout Northern Ireland.  Sinn Fein claims that the target of the explosion may have been the local Catholic Chapel.
Unknown assailants planted an incendiary device at a cash machine in Orio.  The device exploded and residents from three surrounding buildings had to be evacuated while authorities made safe the area.
Shots were fired at the settlement of Dugit in the northern part of the Gaza Strip.  No one was wounded.
A mortar shell was fired at the settlement of Netzarim in the Gaza Strip.  No one was hurt.
A pipe bomb was thrown at a Catholic home on Alliance Avenue in north Belfast.  Hugh McInally, who lives in the targeted house believes that the perpetrators threw the device over the peace wall, which runs through his back garden.  The bomb caused no damage because it was caught in wire meshing that McInally had installed on his windows.
A car bomb, containing over 30 kg of dynamite failed to fully detonate in Madrid.  The dynamite is thought to have been stashed in a pressure cooker but only the detonator of the bomb actually exploded.  The target of the attack appears to be a judge from the National Audit office, Eliseo Fernandez Centeno.  The Madrid Commando of the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) group is being blamed for the attack.  An hour after this first blast, a second car exploded in the La Ventilla district of Madrid.  Authorities believe this to be the ETA getaway car that was exploded to get rid of all the evidence of the earlier attack.
A convoy transporting trade minister Abdul al-Kumayem and Mahwit's provincial governor Abdul Hamid Numan came under fire in an ambush by tribesmen in the run-up to municipal elections.
Ten suspected paramilitaries killed Ivan Villamizar, the dean of the Libre University in Cucuta and former Santander ombudsman.
Palestinians fired at settler's houses from the Hebron neighborhood of Abu-Sunaynah.  No one was injured.
Palestinians shot and wounded a settler from Qiryat Arba in the Hebron Hills on the Susya-Ma'on road.
Palestinians fired a mortar shell at the Gaza Strip settlement of Netzarim.  No one was injured.
Two rickshawpullers were injured when a bomb was thrown near the Proshika Bhaban at Mirpur Section 2.
Border Police bomb disposal experts safely detonated an explosive charge which had been planted on Morag settlement's fence near the greenhouses.
Shots were fired at the settlement of Pesagot.  No one was injured.
Kurdish Democratic Party (KDP) leader Faranso Hariri was shot dead on the street in Arbil by unidentified gunmen.
Shots were fired at a bus at the Neve Deqalim industrial zone.  No one was injured.
Five explosive charges were found and safely detonated near the West Bank settlement of Homesh.
A powerful bomb was found and defused between the Federal Security Office and the Chechen Prosecutor's Office in Chechnya. The bomb was defused about 1/2 hour after it was found. Detectives were investigating the situation and the conditions surrounding the placement of the bomb.
The Earth Liberation Front (ELF) claimed responsibility for setting fire to a cotton gin, owned by Delta & Pine Land Company, the largest seller and developer of transgenic cotton in the United States.  The attack took place in Visalia, California when unknown perpetrators cut through a padlocked door, placed five gallon buckets of gasoline inside and set the cotton gin alight.  The ELF says that they perpetrated the attack to rid the environment of genetically altered cotton.  In a written statement, the group writes, we choose this warehouse because it contained massive quantities of transgenic cotton seek in storage.  But now, this seed will no longer exist to contaminate the environment, enrich a sick corporation or contribute to its warped research programs.  Authorities are unsure if the ELF is truly responsible or if they are just taking credit for the incident.
Two people were killed and four injured when a car bomb, which contained five or six kilos of explosives, detonated outside the Martutene train station in San Sebastian.  The target of the attack was Inaki Dubrueil Churraca, a Socialist councilor, who had just stepped off the train on his way to work.  The two people killed were described as workers, and the injured included Churraca and his bodyguards.Note:  In a communiqu published by the Basque daily Gara on 30 March 2001, the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) claimed responsibility for this attack.
Mortar shells were fired at the Gaza Strip settlement of Dugit.  No one was injured.
Shots were fired at a second Israeli bus in Neve Deqalim.  Again, no one was hurt.
A bomb exploded at the home of Radio Caracol journalist Zoraida Ariza Mateus in the western province of Arauca.  The motive of the attack is unknown.
Arsonists tried to set a Telefonica office on fire with two cans of petrol in Eskoriatza.  The flames were quickly extinguished and only the faade of the building was damaged.
Shots were fired at an Israeli car as it passed a military roadblock near Shuwaykah village north of Tulkarm.  No one was injured.
A masked man entered a post office in Hernani at opening time, announced to everyone that he was planting a bomb and left.  The device exploded but didn't cause any injuries.
Shots were fired at an Israeli car near Elon More.  No one was injured.
Two Israelis from East Jerusalem were wounded by gunfire along the Giv'at Ze'ev-Modi'in road, near Bet Horon.
Palestinians fired shots near the settlement of Itamar in the Nablus area.  No one was injured.
A cash dispenser belonging to a branch of the BBVA bank in Bilbao Square in Vitoria was attacked with Molotov cocktails.  The blast started a fire at a car parked nearby.
Hours after a first bus was destroyed in San Sebastian, a second bus was set on fire in the city.  No further information is provided.
A group of unknown youths were attempting to set a bus on fire when a patrol car pulled up and the assailants fled.  This is the third time a bus was to be attacked by arsonists in San Sebastian in a 24-hour period.
Officer Inaki Totorika was killed in a car bomb blast that bears the hallmarks of a Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) attack.  The bomb detonated while Totorika and another Ertzaintza officer were attempting to haul the vehicle away.  The attack comes one week after the Ertzaintza carried out multiple operations against ETA.  Note:  On 31 March, ETA claimed responsibility for this attack in a communiqu in which they threatened the Basque Police Force, which they describe as a ...repressive regional corps controlled by Spain.
A makeshift explosive device detonated at the offices of the Ministry of Health Regional Directorate in Thessaloniki.  At the scene of the blast, authorities found a note stating that the attack had been in protest to the delays in the case of Panayiotis Vasilellis, a child who died of leukemia after he was denied treatment because of bureaucratic problems.Note:  On 17 March, a group called Movement Against State Arbitrariness claimed this attack and two others that took place on this evening.
Two mortars were fired at the settlement of Netzarim in the Gaza Strip.  No one was hurt.
Bomb experts defused a 46 pound device that was left on the main Dublin-Belfast railway line between Lurgan and Lisburn.  The security operation began eleven days earlier, on 25 February, when authorities were warned by telephone and the signal operator was warned at gunpoint of an attack.  The railway line had been shut down and passengers were bused between Belfast and the border town of Newry.
Five Portuguese nationals working in Cabinda province, Angola were kidnapped by the Front for the Liberation of Cabinda Enclave- Renewed (FLEC-R), a local separatist group. David Jesus Monteiro, Adriano Moreira Dias, Augusto da Nova, Gabriel Faria Pinto, and Augusto Pires all work for Soares da Costa, a construction company.  FLEC-R and its larger counterpart the Front for the Liberation of Cabinda Enclave/Armed Forces of Cabinda (FLEC-FAC) frequently employ kidnapping as a means of leveraging their demands for independence. These men were eventually released on May 23rd, 2001.
Members of the Ertzaintza deactivated a device, which consisted of a camping gas canister and a can of petrol, that had been left outside a Caja Laboral Bank office in Zarauz.
Palestinians shot and injured a Petah Tiqua resident.  The gunfire came from Hebron's Abu-Sunaynah neighborhood and was directed at settlers in the city's Gross Square.
A homemade explosive device went off at a branch of the BBVA bank in Barcelona.  The blast damaged the door of the bank, the ATM and a car parked nearby.
Three men of Chechen origin hijacked a Russian Tu-154 passenger airplane that left Istanbul bound for Moscow.  The plane had about 166 people on board, mostly of Turkish origin.  The hijackers were demanding an end to hostilities in Chechnya in exchange for the release of the passengers.  One of the hijackers and a flight attendant were killed in the operation to free the hostages.
Arsonists set fire to a branch of the BSCH bank in Hernani by smashing the windows of the bank, pouring inflammable liquid inside and then setting it alight.  The blaze caused minor damage to the inside of the bank and to a vehicle parked nearby.
Santos Santamaria Avedano, a member of the Catalan Police Force, was killed when a Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) car bomb exploded in Roses.  Avedano was responding to the bomb after an ETA member called in a warning of the device.  However, the bomb exploded seven minutes before the caller claimed it would.  Avedano was killed by shrapnel that was thrown out by the blast.  The car, which contained 50 kilos of explosive, was parked outside the hotel Montecarlo when it exploded.
The National Liberation Army (ELN) kidnapped Danish citizen Eric Ericcsen and his girlfriend.  The girlfriend was released a few days later, but Ericcsen was held until 42 April.  The Red Cross negotiated his release and no ransom was paid.
Taliban education minister Mulla Amir Khan Muttaqi was wounded in a bomb blast in Kabul; five others died in the explosion.  The bomb was placed in a taxi cab, and the minister was injured when his car drove past the cab as the explosion went off.
A petrol bomb exploded at the Imperial Bar in Ballymena, causing scorch and fire damage to the premises.  No further information is available.
Palestinians fired at two civilian buses near the settlement of Ofra.  No injuries were reported.
At an illegal roadblock set up on a road between Medellin and Montebello (Antioquia Department), the National Liberation Army (ELN) kidnapped the wife of the mayor of Arboletes and three shopkeepers.
The National Liberation Army (ELN) kidnapped five employees of the Colombian Family Welfare Institute (ICBF) and one shopkeeper.  The five were released on or before 26 March 2001.
Unidentified assailants set fire to a car belonging to an Ertzaintza member in the town of Ondarroa.  No further information is available.
An explosive device detonated next to the door of a Citroen car dealership in Galdacao.  The device, which was made of a camping gas canister, caused a variety of forms of damage to the premises.
Palestinians fired at the Neve Deqalim industrial zone and the settlement.  No one was hurt.
Four people accused of being guerrilla collaborators were killed by paramilitaries in Barrancabermeja.  No further information is provided.
Israeli Police bomb disposal experts discovered and dismantled an explosive charge that was planted near Petah Tikya's municipal building.
The Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) is being blamed for planting two explosives at courthouses in Spain.  One of these detonated at the courthouse in the town of Azpeitia, causing substantial damage to buildings in the area.  The device consisted of four or five kilos of explosive.  A caller had warned of the bomb, and police were able to cordon off the area and avoid casualties.
Lucila Guarin Ocampo and her 15-year-old daughter were killed after being held by suspected National Liberation Army (ELN) guerrillas who accused them of helping the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC).
An anonymous group claimed responsibility for setting fire to thirty-six SUVs in Eugene, Oregon, causing about $1 million in damages.  The perpetrator set fire to several Suburban and Tahoe models at the Joe Romania Chevrolet, the same site that had been attacked by arsonists in June 2000.  It took fire officials over an hour to extinguish the flames, which melted upholstery, electrical wiring and engine parts.  Authorities may have found evidence of an incendiary device, but no further information is provided.  The claim of responsibility stated that the group carried out the attack in protest of pollution from SUVs and to show solidarity with two men charged with the firebombing of the same dealership in June 2000.
Palestinians opened fire from Beit Jala in Jerusalem's Gilo neighborhood.  No one was hurt.
Unknown perpetrators threw a bomb at a mini bus injuring two people.  The bus was near the Muktijoddha Super Market at Hatkola.
A home-made device, comprised of a gas cylinder with flammable liquid, exploded at the door of the office of the Justice of the Peace in Vizcaya province.  The main door of the judicial premises was completely destroyed.
Two Palestinians were injured as their car was attacked.  An anonymous caller claimed the attack on behalf of the Committee for the Security of the Highways.Note: The Committee for the Security of the Highways is thought to be associated with the outlawed Kach right-wing Israeli group.  This shooting could also be a case of mistaken identity by Palestinian gunmen.
The Earth Liberation Front (ELF) claimed responsibility for attempting to set a Nike shoe outlet on fire in Albertville, Minnesota.  Authorities discovered several milk jugs filled with gasoline on the roof of the building and evacuated the premises.  The fire had failed to ignite and no damages or injuries were caused.  The ELF stated that it targeted the Nike store because of treacherous conditions at Nike plants around the world and because of the companys role in globalization of trade.
Eight petrol bombs were thrown at a Protestant estate in Londonderry.  Two of the eight hit a house, causing damage to the front door.
Free Aceh Movement (GAM) rebels forced residents to evacuate their homes and then set fire to 14 houses.
Terrorists detonated explosive devices at three locations: a train station at Hat Yai, a gas storage facility in Songkhla, and a hotel in Yala.  Ber Satu is believed to have been responsible for the attacks.Note: Ber Satu is an allied group composed of the Pattani United Liberation Army (PULO) and the Barisan Revolusi Nasional (BRN).  They had recently received explosives training in a Middle Eastern country.
The Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MRTA) planted three homemade explosive devices in outlying areas of Lima, which were defused by the bomb squad.  The devices were attached to red flags, one of which bore the MRTA acronym.  The first was found in Ate-Vitarte in eastern Lima, the second in Santa Anita, and the third in El Agustino.
An explosive device with 100 grams of dynamite detonated outside the home of the director of CPAM (a health insurance agency).
A Telecom phone card was used to make the call that triggered a car bomb explosion in Rome, causing damages to a building that houses the Institute for International Affairs and the Association for Relations between Italy and the U.S.Note:  A left wing group claimed responsibility for this attack.  The Revolutionary Proletarian Initiative Nuclei (NIPR) or Nuclei di Iniziativa Proletaria Rivoluzionaria emailed a newspaper saying that the blast was in protest to recent attempts to limit the right of workers to strike.
A Molotov cocktail was thrown at a Rome temporary work agency called  Orienta in Via Tuscolana.  Note:  In a note mailed from Turin's Porta Nuova railroad station and delivered to La Stampa, the Anti-Capitalist Attack Nuclei (NAA) claimed responsibility for this attack.
The Deputy Interior Minister Habib Sanginov was assassinated.  He was one of the first members of the former Islamic opposition to join the current government.Note:  Moscow Russian TV RTR  and Mashhad Voice of the Islamic Republic of Iran also reported this incident.
A mortar-shell bomb wired to a timer detonated near a political candidate's campaign vehicle in North Cotabato Province.
At least thirty villagers from the community of Alto de Naya in Cauca province were killed in an attck by the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC).   They were accused by the killers of having aided leftist guerillas.
A petrol bomb thrown at the Olive Tree government building caused very little damage.  The wall of the building was daubed with the words Democratic Left Agents of NATO.  Authorities suspect that the Anti-Imperialist Territorial Nuclei (NTA) was involved in this attack.
An explosive device detonated at a London postal sorting center, blowing the windows out but injuring no one.  Authorities are blaming the Real Irish Republican Army (RIRA) for trying to derail the peace process.
The Earth Liberation Front (ELF) claimed responsibility for setting fire to three cement trucks that belonged to the Ross Island Sand & Gravel Company, in Portland, Oregon.  The attack was perpetrated, according to the group, to protest the company's mining of a 40-acre site in the Columbia River Gorge.  The fire was started when four containers of gasoline were lit with a timing device.  The damages totaled over $210,000.  In their written communiqu, the group states, Let this be a warning to all the greedy corporations who exploit our Earth's natural resources.  In October of 2002, two men, Jacob Sherman and Michael Scarpitti, were arrested in connection with this arson attack and another that took place in June 2001, which targeted a logging company is Estacada.
A Palestinian militia man was fired on in his car.  He accused the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) of attacking him, but the IDF denies this attack (and has claimed all others).  It is more likely inter-group fighting between Palestinians,or simply a case of mistaken identity.
Gunmen attacked a candidate for governor of Maguindanao province, killing three supporters and wounding five others.
Police believe members of the United Self-Defense Groups of Colombia (AUC) murdered two men on the outskirts of Sabanas de San Angel municipality.  No motive for the murders was given.
Islamic vigilantes belonging to the Hisba group destroyed several hotels in Christian districts that were suspected of selling liquor.  Note: The region has recently come under Islamic religious law, and the government has begun enforcing the prohibition of liquor by investigating establishments and burning the liquor stocks of confirmed purveyors.
A bomb, placed underneath a vehicle, exploded outside the Yugoslav government offices in the center of the Kosovo capital, Pristina, killing one person and injuring four others. The identity of the attackers was unknown, but the attack was viewed by many officials as an attempt to undermine the ongoing efforts to create a new Constitution and stable situation in Kosovo.
Oscar Gomez Torralba, a mayoral candidate, was assassinated in La Paz Town, Agusan del Sur privince, by the New People's Army (NPA).
A man was found dead in the trunk of an abandoned car.  The cause of death is unknown.  Israeli police claim it was a terrorist attack.
An explosive device, located in a push-cart, detonated near a police station in India-controlled Kashmir, killing one, injuring twenty-five and causing property damage to surrounding houses and cars.
A stolen car exploded in a market.  Ha'aretz said that the trunk of the car was filled with nails as well as explosive devices, and the reports say that this is becoming a common tool of Palestinian terrorists.  Hamas claimed responsibility for this attack.Note:  Middle East Wire reports that the incident was a pipe bomb. And yet another report mentioned that the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) claimed the attack.
Three children were killed when an explosive device detonated in a village in Turkabad.  Five other children were injured in the blast.
A group of unknown individuals doused flammable liquid on a BBVA bank branch ATM in San Sebastian, setting it on fire.  The fire caused major property damage to both the ATM and the bank branch.
Six members of the International Committee of the Red Cross were killed outside the town of Bunia.  The bodies of the victims-- four local Congolese staff, a Swiss nurse and a Colombian relief worker-- were found by Ugandan Army troops.  The motive and prepetrators of the killing are unknown.
Palestinians planted a nail bomb inside a settlement fence, damaging two houses.
Members of the November's Children terrorist group placed an explosive device outside the door of former Undersecretary to the Social Security Ministry and Secretary to New Democracy (ND)'s Central Committee, Dhimitrios Sioufas.  The fire caused limited damage to the door.  A short while later, a man called the Athens Elevtherotypia newspaper to claim responsibility on behalf of November's Children.
There was a mob attack on a rebuilt mosque.  Reliable witnesses describe the attack as orchestrated.
A bomb squad defused an explosive device near a private school in Potushahi.
Militants abducted four villagers from Sangla village who were later killed along with three others who had asked for their release.
Six Hindu villagers were decapitated and three injured by armed men in the Doda district of Kashmir.  No one has claimed responsibility for the attack, but police blame Muslim militants who are known to be active in the area.
Ten dynamite sticks connected to three gas cylinders were discovered on the ground floor of the town hall in Zonza.  The device was defused by experts.  The same town hall has been the target of three attacks in the last ten years.
Two days before elections, Congressman Marcia Punzalan Jr. and two security aides were killed while attending a campaign rally for Punzalan's wife.   A civilian was accidentally wounded also.
An explosive device detonated near the Social Democratic Party and New Croat Initiative offices in Novi Travnik.  No one was hurt, but the building was destroyed.Note:  Though not confirmed, this attack was probably perpetrated by Bosnian Croat extremists.
Four mortar bombs were fired from Gaza at the Kibbutz Nir-Am settlement.
An unknown explosive device exploded in the vicinity of the Bessbrook Community Center which is located near the rear of the South Armagh police station.  Police are investigating the origin of the device.  They say it appears that a missile was fired from a van and then the van was abandoned.  No one admitted responsibility but police chiefs believe the attack was linked to dissident republicans, probably the real IRA.
A 40-pound car bomb exploded in an upscale part of Bogot near a busy park.  Officials are attributing the explosion to either a gang or a paramilitary group so it may not be a terrorism incident.
Maoist Communist Center (MCC) members opened fire on five girls after they were unable to find the girls' father.  The attack left two young girls dead and the remaining three injured.
Several unknown persons staged a Molotov cocktail attack against the gendarmerie barracks in Hasparren in French Basque Country.  One of the bombs started a small fire at the door of the building while the other bomb bounced off the window and landed on a parked car, lighting it on fire.  No one has claimed responsibility for the attack.
The Earth Liberation Front (ELF) claimed responsibility for two separate fires occurring on this date.  The first fire at a research lab in Seattle, Washington destroyed a building at the University of Washington Center for Urban Horticulture.  The second fire at a poplar tree nursery in Clatskanie, Oregon destroyed two buildings and several vehicles.  Officials believe the attacks were perpetrated because both sites have been linked with genetic modification, a practice the Earth Liberation Front (EFL) openly disagrees with.
A security guard from the University of the Basque Country (UPV) found a limpet bomb in the vehicle he was driving.  After he discovered it, he placed it in a trash bin where it was safely exploded by the authorities.  The University suspects the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) is responsible for the attack.
A newspaper executive was shot in the head, shortly after parking his car near a hospital.  The victim, Santiago Oleaga, was the CFO of El Diario Vasco, a daily newspaper that openly condemned the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA).  In related news, a car exploded near the area about an hour later, injuring no one.  Police believe the car was used as a getaway car after the shooting, and the explosion was intended to destroy evidence.  In a communiqu published by the Basque daily Gara on 26 July 2001, the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) claimed responsibility for this attack.  On 30 January 2006 the National High Court sentenced four male members of ETA to imprisonment for this murder.  The sentences ranged from two years to forty-seven years in jail.
The Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) claimed responsibility for parking a car bomb 20 meters from the Jerusalem police station and 50 meters from Mombaz street (series of night clubs).
An Israeli car traveling from the Neve Daniel settlement near Bethlehem in the West Bank was shot at.  Al-Fatah's Battalions of Return claimed responsibility for this attack.
Two American journalists were abducted by members of the Fatah Hawks, in a kidnapping incident designed to send a message to the U.S. and Britain about re-evaluating their policies.  Neither journalist was hurt, and they were freed after a few hours.
A grenade was thrown over a fence guarding the Russian Embassy in Belarus.  Belarus authorities are investigating the attack as terrorism.
Unidentified individuals threw a petrol bomb into the home of a Basque Socialist Party councilor, Herminio Teminio.  No one was injured.
Nine were killed and twenty-five injured by an explosive device in a Catholic church.  No one has claimed responsibility for the bomb attack, but police suspect pro-Taliban Islamic fundamentalists.
An Indian rights activist was kidnapped by gunmen on motorcycles.  Kimi Pernia, the victim, was fighting on behalf of the local indigenous population of Cordoba at the time the kidnapping incident occurred.
Petrol bombs were hurled at two buses in the Basque town of Bermeo.  Although no one was hurt, the buses were completely destroyed.  Authorities blame the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) for this attack which follows serious rioting in Bergara over the weekend.
A petrol bomb was hurled through the window of a bar in Cloughmills.  No one was injured.  Authorities have not ruled out a sectarian motive.
An explosive device detonated at the Peugeot dealership in San Sebastian, damaging the front of the dealership and burning out two cars but causing no injuries.
A car bomb exploded in the northern city of Logrono, injuring five people.  A warning call was made 45 minutes prior to the blast by someone on behalf of the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) group.Note:  In a communiqu published by the Basque daily Gara on 26 July 2001, the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) claimed responsibility for this attack.
Two policemen were injured in Chechnya when their vehicle came under attack by a grenade launcher.
An unexploded homemade device was found next to a Ford dealership.  The building belongs to Telefonica (telephone company) but is occupied by staff of Atento, Telefonica's help line service.  The bomb could be in protest to the visit of US President George Bush.  The First of October Antifascist Resistance Movement (GRAPO) could be to blame.  This is one of two bombs found in the area.  The other was found at the entrance to the parking lot of the Telefonica office building.
The New People's Army (NPA) claimed responsibility for the murder of Congressman Rodolfo Aguinaldo and his bodyguard.
Four luxury homes, being built in the foothills of the Santa Catalina Mountains, north of Tucson, were set ablaze by unknown arsonists.  Damages caused by the fire are estimated at about $2 million.  Authorities found an ignition device at the scene of the attack, but are still unsure about how the fire was actually started.  One of the homes damaged bore the initials CSP, which stand for the Coalition to Save the Preserves, a group that protests construction in the desert preserves area of Tucson.
This is the third in a series of explosive devices detonated by the Muttahida Qami Movement (MQM) protesting a water shortage.  The bomb detonated outside a shop in southern Karachi and injured the shop owner.
Jammu and Kashmir police seized a three-wheeled vehicle carrying two improvised explosive devices.  Police say the militants were planning to blow up the civil secretariat in Kashmir.
Timur Kodezov, the head of the mission in Ingushetia, was killed in his car.  No further information is available.
A World War II veteran was shot and killed in the village of Gekhi, Chechnya.  He is the fifth Gekhi villager to be killed in two days.
A homemade device was found outside the Socialist Party offices in Elgoibar.  A local resident warned police that there was a suspicious rucksack left outside the entrance to the building.  The device was made of two butane gas canisters attached to a can containing 5L of petrol.  Police safely removed the bomb.
Nicolas Giudici, a journalist working for Corse Matin and Nice Matin was found dead in a river on the island of Corsica.  He had been fatally shot.  His car had been burned and was found 50 km away from the body.  His latest work was titled, The Twilight of the Corsicans which denounced cronyism and vendetta in Corsica in 1997.
Two time bombs were found in a package that was left outside an apartment building which also houses a trade union in the Taksim neighborhood of Istanbul.  Bomb experts safely defused the devices.
A car bomb in Zhukovskiy Prospekt killed three and injured six.  The car exploded as an army lorry was passing by, and the blast caused the lorry to strike a crowd of shoppers.  Witnesses say the vehicle containing the explosives had been parked at the scene for about two hours.
John Henry McCormick was shot and killed by masked gunmen who forced their way into his house.  McCormick has been the victim of other attacks in recent years, including a pipe bomb attack in May 2001.  Police believe that loyalists are responsible for the murder.
Forty to 60 workers (varies by report), including several foreign nationals of unspecified citizenship, were taken hostage in a large scale kidnapping incident and were later freed by youths demanding jobs, money, and amenities in Finima (i.e. a greater sharing of the revenues from the oil native to their homeland).
Two Catholic women escaped injury when their home in the Peter's Hill area was the target of a petrol bomb attack.  The Ulster Freedom Fighters (UFF) or the Ulster Defense Association (UDA) are being blamed for the attack.
A grenade attack by pro-Pakistan fighters against a pro-Indian government militant group missed its target and injured eleven civilians.
A pipe bomb exploded in the backyard of the home of a 60- year-old woman and her son.  Security sources believe that loyalists are responsible for this attack.  The blast blew out a number of windows.
An Israeli shepherd was shot as he tended his flock in the southern West Bank.
Ciaran Cummings was shot and killed by two men driving on a motorcycle as he stood waiting for a ride to work.  Sinn Fein councillor, Martin Meehand, said the victim received verbal threats from the Loyalist Volunteer Forces (LVF), and Assistant Chief Constable Alan McQuillan confirmed that anti-Catholic extremists were possible suspects.Note:  A caller representing the Red Hand Defenders claimed responsibility for this attack and said it was perpetrated in response to the election of two Sinn Fein members to the local council in June.
A petrol bomb was thrown through the window of a flat in the town of Portrush.  The blast started a fire which firefighters extinguished.  Authorities are considering this a sectarian attack.
A radio host, known for his outspoken criticism of public officials, was shot and killed outside his home.  The radio host had reported receiving threats in the days before his murder.
A homemade device, consisting of a camping gas cylinder and a bottle of flammable liquid, exploded at a cash dispenser belonging to Caja Navarra bank in Pamplona.  The blast completely burnt out the ATM.
A bomb attempt was thwarted by police, and four suspects were arrested.  Two of the four explosive devices were found in a handbag carried by one of the suspects.  Upon arrest the suspect admitted that two other criminals were hiding nearby.
Israeli police captured a 17-year old Palestinian in Afula.  He was carrying a knapsack with nails and explosive devices.
An explosive device detonation near the West Bank settlement of Eilon Morah caused no casualties.  Security forces have been on alert for bombings and other violence in retaliation for Israeli demolitions of Palestinian homes.
The brother of an Indian member of Parliament was shot and killed by Muslim militants in India-controlled Kashmir.
Mikel Uribe, a Basque policeman was shot and killed by several gunmen in Leaburu.  Uribe once headed the regional police forces in Hernani where Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) members focused much of their violence.  ETA is being blamed for this murder and for a car bomb attack that killed a councilor in Leiza only a few hours earlier.Note:  On 26 July, ETA published a communiqu in which they claimed responsibility for fifteen attacks including this one.
An explosive device detonated under an overpass, 300 meters from a police station.  Two people were injured in the blast.
An armed security guard at an abortion clinic, the Fertility Control Clinic,  was shot and killed by a gunman.  The gunman was subdued by two bystanders and subsequently arrested.
Karin Yuldashev, an advisor to the President of Tajikistan, was assassinated by the United Tajik Opposition (UTO).
Two mortar bombs were fired upon Netzarim, a Jewish settlement in the Gaza Strip.
A letter bomb detonated at TG4, a TV station owned by Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, injuring a secretary.  The blast occurred within hours of a bomb at a Benetton store in Treviso and just days before the Group of Eight summit.  Authorities believe these explosive attacks to be the work of anarchists who aim to increase tensions in the days leading up the G8 Summit.Note:  A group calling itself Cooperative of Hand-Made Fire and Related Items but with reference to the International Solidarity group, claimed responsibility for this and two other parcel bomb attacks.  In their communiqu, the group shows its solidarity with, ...comrades who are fighting to free themselves from the yoke of the State and of Capital.  The group also states, Freedom for all prisoners, freedom for the oppressed, freedom for the Mapuche people oppressed by Benetton.
The Revolutionary Front group claimed responsibility for setting a temporary employment agency on fire by spraying their name on the wall at the site of the attack.  The perpetrators broke the windows of the office and sprinkled flammable liquid inside before setting it alight.  Temporary employment is one of the issues anti-globalization demonstrators are protesting against in the lead-up to the Group of Eight Summit to be held in Genoa.
Dissident republicans, possible the Provisional Irish Republican Army (PIRA), are being blamed for planting a coffee jar bomb in the back garden of a house in the White City area of Belfast.  The jar was packed with handmade explosives, a technique used by the PIRA in the past.  Bomb disposal experts defused the device without incident.
Two explosive devices damaged the offices of the mayor and a national senator's offices in Medellin.  The bombs, which exploded early in the morning, caused no injuries but did cause extensive damages to both buildings.  Colombian authorities blame the National Liberation Army (ELN).
Islamic militants attacked Hindu pilgrims with two grenades.  Fourteen people were killed in the blasts including two policemen and one militant.  Police blames Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT); however, no one has claimed responsibility.
The Earth Liberation Front (ELF) claimed responsibility for slashing tires and breaking windows to vehicles belonging to a natural gas power plant that is being built in Oldham County by Houston-based Dynegy Inc.  Damages were caused to fifteen vehicles at the controversial power plant site.  The group believes that the vehicles were being used to rape the earth.  In their written message, the ELF stated, we wanted to send a clear message to Dynegy that the people will not sit around idly while our earth and health is put into jeopardy for the sake of a few fat wallets in Houston.
An explosive device detonated as an Israeli bus drove by.  Nobody was injured.
Police detonated an explosive device found near a church in East Jakarta.  The incident occurred the day after two other area churches were bombed.
An ATM belonging to a branch of the Caixa de Pensions in Barcelona was destroyed by a homemade incendiary device.
Fourteen gendarmes were slightly injured when a large explosive detonated at their barracks in Borgo.  The victims were a part of a mobile anti-riot unit.  The perpetrators are being described as a commando made up of several people.  Leaflets found at the scene of the blast called for the release of nationalist prisoners.Note:  On 20 October, an anonymous, unknown group claimed responsibility for this attack and three others.  The group accuses the French colonial state of having deceived the Corsican people under cover of a pseudo so-called Matignon process.
An explosive device detonated in a Catholic Church, injuring one woman.
Police say twenty Free Aceh Movement (GAM) rebels set fire to two government buildings.  No further information is provided.
On a night of much violence in the Basque Country, unknown individuals poured inflammable liquid into a cash dispenser in Portugalete.  No further information is provided.
An ATM belonging to Finansbank in Pendik in Istanbul Province was the target of an explosive attack.  Material damage was caused to the bank.
An explosive device, located inside a shopping bag detonated outside the La Caixa bank in downtown Barcelona, injuring three people.
Two Molotov cocktails were hurled at the Mollet del Valles office of the Popular Party (PP).  Neither device entered the office but started a small fire outside the building.
A group calling itself Enraged Proletarians claimed responsibility for setting an ATM on fire with explosive devices.  The ATM is owned by the state-controlled National Bank.
During a night of street violence, the private home of Jose Perez, a General Union of Workers (UGT) local delegate and member of the Basque Socialist Party, was damaged.  Police couldn't determine if the damage caused was due to an explosive device or arson.
An arson attack at the Umatilla Chip Mill, owned by Boise Cascade, caused an estimated $1.5 million in damages.  The fire, which was started at the chip mill, spread to over 5,000 acres and damaged nearby logs and logging equipment.  Boise Cascade blames the attack on the Earth Liberation Front (ELF), who has both threatened the company and set fire to another of their buildings in Manmouth, Oregon.
Gavin Brett, an 18-year-old Protestant boy, was shot and killed as he stood outside a GAA athletics club in Glengormley.  A second teenager was also shot and injured in the ankle.  The Red Hand Defenders claimed responsibility for the murder, stating that they were going to increase the ferocity against Catholics in the area.
The office of a Justice of the Peace in Hernani was damaged by a homemade explosive device.  No further information is available.
The wife and daughter of a clergyman were injured when an explosive device detonated in their automobile.  One of the victims said that two young people on a motorcycle threw the bomb into the van.
A parcel bomb was sent to Corsican nationalist leader, Jean-Guy Talamoni.  The bomb contained a mix of gel and nails and was similar to a second parcel bomb found on this day, sent to nationalist lawyer, Marie-Helene Mattei.  These attacks are the first time petrol bombs have been used on the island of Corsica.
Militants attacked a television relay station near Chauvay, exchanging fire with armed guards.  No one was injured and the station was not damaged.
In a large-scale kidnapping incident, Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG) rebels took more than thirty hostages from a Christian village on Basilan Island.  Nine were later released.  The Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG) demanded an end to the military operations against them.  Nine of the kidnapping victims were executed between 1 August and 4 August.
During a match between two sub-district teams contesting the North Aceh Mayor's Cup, two homemade explosive devices detonated at the Rasasakti soccer stadium in Lhokseumawe, Aceh.  Both bombs exploded at the front gate, causing no injuries.  The Free Aceh Movement (GAM) is presumed responsible for the attacks.
The Israel Defense Forces (IDF), Israeli military forces, intercepted a Palestinian as he tried to plant an explosive device.
An explosive device detonated on a bus near the disputed border between the Indian and Pakistani zones of Kashmir.  The bus was headed for Rawalpindi. A Pakistani soldier was killed, and two others were injured.
The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) claimed a Palestinian man they shot and killed was in the act of planting a bomb north of Nablus.  The bomb exploded under the soldiers' shooting, killing him and wounding his companion who escaped.
The Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) claimed responsibility for an explosive attack on the Spanish high-speed train line between Madrid and Alicante in La Roda.  No further information is provided.
Thirty minutes after a warning call to a medical service, a bomb exploded around midnight in Ealing Broadway, West London, injuring seven people.  The bomb, estimated to have contained 25-40 kg of explosives, was found in a blue barrel.  The Real Irish Republican Army (RIRA) is held responsible for the attack.Note:  Two men, James McCormack and John Hannan admitted in court on 23 January 2003 to plotting to cause explosions at this site on this date as part of a RIRA bombing campaign.
Bomb disposal experts defused three 30-liter barrels of an explosive substance that had been left near the vacation home of a Parisian company boss.Note:  On 20 August, the Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC) claimed responsibility for this attack and said they attack parts of the French State who, with the complicity of certain media, spread the most incredible rumors.
An explosive device, consisting of various camping gas and petrol canisters, started a fire at a dry cleaner's shop in Villava.  The shop belongs to Juan Francisco Eransus, a Union of the Navarrese People (UPN) councilor.
Sudanese rebels from the Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA) claim to have attacked a Canadian-operated oil operation in southern Sudan, destroying equipment and stopping the flow of crude oil.  However, the oil company, Talisman Energy Corp., has denied their claims.
An explosive device killed a woman in a residential area of Surabaya.  However, the accounts surrounding the circumstances of the blast are conflicting.
Two houses belonging to senior members of the former Israeli-allied South Lebanon Army militia were blown up using explosive devices. One of the houses belonged to Robin Abboud; the other to Samir Raslan.  Hizbollah is suspected.
Loyalists are being blamed for planting a pipe bomb at a house in Garvagh.  Sources believe that the device may have been planted in protest to restrictions on the Apprentice Boys parade.
An explosive device detonated near a Venice courthouse, damaging a wall of the building.  A police officer was slightly injured.  The bomb comes only weeks after several other bombings during G8 summit meetings in Genoa.Note:  Twenty different groups claimed responsibility for this attack.  Authorities were treating them all seriously and haven't determined the true perpetrators.
A suicide bomber carrying a 5 to 10 kilogram bomb detonated his explosives on the ground floor of the Sbarro pizza parlor on King George St. and Jaffa Road, killing himself and fifteen others, including two Americans.  Upwards of 132 people were injured.  Islamic Jihad in Beirut and Hezbollah claimed responsibility for the attack, but Hamas claimed the suicide bomber as their very own and identified him as 23 year old Azzadin al-Masri from Akbe, southeast of Jenin.
In a kidnapping incident, a retired American police officer and his girlfriend were taken from his beachfront home.  Leticia Lopez later escaped, but the body of Thomas Giblins was found a few days after the kidnapping.  Police have found much evidence that the man was killed just after he had been taken hostage.
A train carrying refugees was derailed by an explosive device, probably remote-detonated, between Luanda and Dodo in Angola.  The attackers then killed a number of people attempting to escape from the train wreckage.  Ninety-one additional people were killed and 165 wounded in this attack.
Three people were killed, and sixteen were injured when an explosive device detonated in a crowded street in Quetta.
An explosive device detonated on a train, killing one and injuring a dozen others. The train was near Ghaziabad on the Delhi border.
Militants shot and killed five Hindus in a village called Sarar Bagga in Kashmir.  The following morning, two Muslims were killed by an explosive device which had been attached to the bodies of the initial victims.
A bomb on a train killed three and injured eighteen on the eve of India's Independence Day.
A 12-year-old boy was badly beaten after three youths approached him in south Belfast and asked him about his religion.  The boy sustained a cut lip and bruises to the head.
Two explosive devices damaged the Madrid to Seville high speed railway line. Each explosion contained 2kg of Titadene explosives. Significant disruption to rail travel was caused.Note:  In a communique published by the Basque daily Gara on 28 October 2001, the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) claimed responsibility for this attack.
A 17-year-old Israeli girl was killed and three others injured when gunmen fired at their car just inside the green line.  The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) believed the gunmen to be al-Fatah members.
At least 16 small bombs exploded around Aceh's capital.  The Free Aceh Movement (GAM) planned the blast to coincide with Indonesia's Independence Day Celebration.
A pipe bomb found under a table at a Burger King restaurant in Istanbul's Istiklal Street was defused by authorities.  No one has claimed responsibility for placing the device.
Unknown perpetrators cut the overhead power cable of the Renfe railway line in Anoeta.  The perpetrators succeeded in halting service on the Irun-Madrid line for about an hour.
An explosive device  was found in a bazaar in Bekobod; it was removed before it detonated.
An explosive device detonated inside a car, killing one woman and gravely injuring two children.  Police believe the bomb might have been located inside a small toy that one of the children picked up at a restaurant.  The blast was later linked to the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) although the group did not claim responsibility for the attack.
The Catholic Reaction Force (CRF) claimed responsibility for firing shots into a house in Cloughmills, which narrowly missed a 10-year-old boy who was inside at the time.  The group threatened to kill leading loyalists if attacks on Catholics didn't halt.
A remote-detonated explosive device wounded fifteen passengers on a civilian bus.  Authorities attribute the attack to the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE).
Russian authorities found and made safe four explosive devices on the railway near Argun.  The devices were all manufactured from 122mm artillery rounds and plastic explosive.
Israeli sappers defused a car bomb found parked next to the Jerusalem police station.  Officials were alerted to the bomb's presence after a smaller one went off nearby.  No injuries.
An explosive device planted outside Radio Caracol detonated, leaving ten injured.
A small explosive device detonated at Andheria Mor in south Delhi.  No casualties have been reported.  No further detail.
A pipe bomb was made safe after it was found at the Lavery GAA club in Maghera.  This is one in a spate of pipe bomb attacks targeting GAA clubs in the area.Note:  The South Londonderry Protestant Volunteers claimed responsibility for a number of pipe bomb attacks at GAA clubs but it is unclear if this attack is one claimed.
A car bomb exploded, damaging some local government offices.  Authorities attribute the attack to the National Liberation Army (ELN) rebels.
Six people were killed and at least six injured when a car was ambushed by Muslim separatists.  One soldier was among the dead, another among the wounded.
An explosive device detonated near the yard of Gaydar Omanov in an apparent attack on the head of the Golotl village administration.
Unknown arsonists set fire to a ticket machine at the EuskoTren railway station in Loyola.  The machine was totally destroyed and the entrance of the station was damaged by smoke.
Army authorities defused a pipe bomb found in the rear of a house.  This attack came after loyalists said they would continue to attack nationalist homes as long as Republicans attacked loyalists.
A beauty queen and her boyfriend were taken hostage in a kidnapping incident involving the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC)  in Cali during the last week of August.  They were released 1 September 2001 along with a journalist who had been held for more than five months.
Two Hindu priests were beheaded by militants in India controlled Kashmir.
A Palestinian gunmen fired shots in Gilo.  No injuries.
Militants killed a Muslim family of five in Kashmir -- apparently for refusing to supply the militants with food.
An attack on an oil pipeline by unknown perpetrators in Daghestan yielded some damage and disrupted operations.
Two pipe bombs exploded at the home of a Catholic family in Ballynahinch.  The perpetrators tried to enter the house, but when the door was found to be locked, they left the devices outside the door where they exploded.  The homeowner claims his car was destroyed in April 2001 in an arson attack that he blames on the Ulster Defense Association (UDA).Note:  The Red Hand Defenders claimed responsibility for this attack.
Authorities believe that the Armed Islamic Group (GIA) is responsible for an explosion at the center of Algiers that wounded at least 30 people.  The bomb was hidden in a plastic bag.  This is the first such attack in nearly two years.
Two people were injured when an explosive device detonated at a petrol station near Tetovo.  The station was owned by Abduljadi Vejseli, a high-ranking official of the PDP party; this party is one of the two main Albanian political formations in the Macedonian parliament
Yolanda Paternina, a government prosecutor investigating a paramilitary massacre, was shot and killed by motorcycle gunmen.  Two of Paternina's colleagues have been missing since June.  They had been investigating the possibility of Naval Officer complicity in the massacre of 26 people in Chengue in January.
Militants injured three civilians in a grenade attack in northern Kashmir.
Libardo Rodriguez was killed while walking with friends in Giron.  He was the brother of Nicolas Rodriguez Bautista, the leader of the National Liberation Army (ELN).  Another of Bautista's brothers was murdered in March.Note:  This was probably an attack by paramilitary forces against the guerillas.
A group of National Liberation Front of Tripura (NLFT) members raided four hamlets and killed six tribals in Tripura, allegedly for refusing to collaborate.
An explosion occurred in a car parked near a government building in Chechnya, killing the occupant.  This incident was possibly a suicide bomb. The blast produced a meter-deep crater of about two meters in diameter. All windows in nearby buildings were broken, but their frames and roofs were damaged.
A homemade explosive device, composed of a camping gas cylinder and petrol, detonated at a La Caixa cash dispenser in Salvatierra.  The ATM was damaged by the blast.
A Mexican engineer, Everado Castro, was kidnapped by Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) and released on 3 November 2001.  According to a report in a Mexican paper, the Mexican government may have bypassed Bogot and negotiated directly for the victim's release.  Another hostage, whose dates of capture and release were not reported, was also freed by Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC).
Unknown gunmen stopped a lorry on the Newry bypass, forced him out of the vehicle at gunpoint and then set the lorry on fire with petrol bombs.  The driver was ordered to park the lorry across a busy stretch of the road before it was set on fire, thus halting traffic in the area.
The Chancellor of Syiah Kuala University, Dayan Dawood, was shot and killed in Aceh following his offer to mediate between Jakarta and the separatists of the Free Aceh movement (GAM).
Five petrol bombs damaged the house and cars of a customs official in Itxassou.  Two of the devices were thrown into cars, and the other three were thrown into the house.  Four people were asleep at the time of the attack and suffered from shock.  Police have blamed the attack on tiny groups of Basque separatist youths.
A McDonald's fast food restaurant in Tucson, Arizona was torched by the Animal Liberation Front (ALF), a group that has frequently targeted the corporation for killing  cows, chickens and pigs, whether directly or indirectly.  Damage has been estimated at $500,000,Note:  The ALF cites this incident as an anti-globalization action in their 2001 year-end Direct Action Report, available as of 13 January 2003 at http://www.earthliberationfront.com/news/2002/020116ml.html.
A petrol bomb was thrown into an estate agency in Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port and caused extensive damage.  No further information is available.
Army explosives experts defused a pipe bomb that was left at a pub in Portstewart, one of Northern Ireland's most popular seaside resort areas.  The device had been left in the ladies' restroom.
United Airlines Flight 93 from Newark, N.J. was hijacked and diverted from its flight path to San Francisco and crashed near Shanksville, Pennsylvania. The plane crashed shortly after it turned in the direction of Washington, DC.  It is believed that the hijackers were overtaken by the passengers on board and this is what caused the crash in a field in Shanksville.  The hijacked plane could have been headed toward the White House or Capitol Building in Washington, DC.  This is one of four hijacked planes on this morning that were used to cause a total of over 3,000 fatalities.  Al Qaeda is responsible for all four attacks.Note:  As of 12/20/01, the disaster toll stands at 44 fatalities (CBS Morning News, 12/20/01).
Gunmen opened fire on a group of people boarding a bus following a religious ceremony, killing three and injuring four.
Two small explosive devices shattered storefronts in Cucuta, the capital of Norte de Santander.  One of the bombs damaged a warehouse containing shoemaking materials.  The other bomb went off in a shoe factory in a non-commercial area.  Neither blasts caused any injuries.  Police blame guerrillas for the attacks.
Two Italian engineers en route to visit the production facilities of the National Chocolate Company in Rio Negro were abducted by National Liberation Army (ELN) members.  On 12 April 2002, they were released to the Peace Facilitation Commission and the International Committee of the Red Cross.
A gang of Basque radicals threw petrol bombs at the Basque Nationalist Party (PNV) social center and the Basque Solidarity (EA) social center in the town of Oiartzun.  No major damage was caused to either premises.
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) guerrillas detonated an explosive device adjacent to a pumping station of a large natural gas pipeline in Colombia. The pumping station was destroyed, causing $2.9 million damage.  The government was then forced to ration gas.
An explosive device mounted on a bicycle detonated near a bridge, killing six construction workers and injuring forty-five other people.  No one claimed responsibility for the attack.
Following a spate of hate calls and a wave of anti-Islamic sentiment in RSA (precipitated in reaction to 09/11), the offices of the Muslim Judicial Council in Cape Town were set ablaze.
A high official of the Technical Investigations Force of the Colombian Attorney General's Office was assassinated in Cucuta on the country's northeastern border with Venezuela. Several gunmen traveling in a pickup truck shot Jesus David Corzo to death.
Two explosive devices were found and made safe at the gates to Bitung port in North Sulawesi. A port official speculated that the bombs might be detonated on a passenger ship which was about to set sail.
A candidate of the opposition Sam Rainsy Party was murdered in Kampong Cham Province, the fourth such killing in the past four months.  Cambodia's first local elections are scheduled for February.
A pipe bomb exploded in a metal box beside the 17th-hole tee at Castledawson golf course. No casualties were reported.  The Ulster Defense Association (UDA) is being blamed for the device.
A bomb in the exchange station in the old part of the city of Skopje exploded before dawn.  There were no injuries or fatalities.  This is one of many explosive attacks in Macedonia.  Provenance/cause unknown.
A pipe bomb exploded at the Brookfield Mill Community Center in north Belfast at lunchtime, narrowly missing a group of workmen.  A second pipe bomb failed to explode and was defused by Army bomb experts.  The explosion caused slight damage to the building and a car parked nearby.  The attack comes during a month of much sectarian violence.
Palestinian gunmen shot and killed an Israeli woman in the West Bank. Salit Sheetrit, 28, was killed in her car as she and her husband drove through the Jordan Valley. A militant Islamist group, the Jerusalem Brigades of Islamic Jihad in Palestine, claimed responsibility.Note:  At the point of publication, this group was not associated with the established Palestinian Islamic Jihad, but subsequent reports suggest that they have joined the broader Palestinan Islamic Jihad (PIJ).
Local authorities defused an explosive device attached to a tree three metres from the road in Makhachkala, Dagestan.   The device consisted of two kilogrammes of plastic explosive, an electric detonator, a fuse, and several kilogrammes of nails and bolts.
A car belonging to the daughter of a retired Civil Guardsman was the target of a Molotov cocktail attack.  The device started a fire to the car, which was parked in the Milagrosa district of Pamplona.
The widow, child and mother of a soldier killed last year were murdered in their home by unidentified gunmen in Aceh.
An envelope containing an explosive device made of ammonium nitrate and a low-quality detonator was found and defused near the US Embassy.  The envelope was also reported to contain anti-US pamphlets.
An explosive device detonated in a Shell flow station at Olomoro, Isoko North Council Area of Delta State.  At least one security guard was injured. Four people have been arrested.
Palestinians fired a total of six mortar bombs. Two landed in Alei Sinai, lightly wounding two residents and causing damage to a house. One landed in Netiv Ha'asara, two landed near the hothouses in Netzarim, and the other fell a day earlier in a Jewish settlement in the Gaza Strip.
Two petrol bombs were thrown at property in Ustaritz that belongs to a retired member of the Air and Border Police.  The blasts damaged two vehicles that were parked nearby but didn't cause any injuries.
A car bomb exploded in the Talpiot area of Jerusalem.  There were no casualties.  Police estimated the device contained about 8kg of explosives.  Nuts, bolts and bullets were added for extra fragmentation effect.  Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) claimed responsibility.
An explosive device damaged the car of the Chiba Prefect government official.  Note:  This incident may be linked to opposition to expand Narita Airport.
One young person was killed and eight wounded, one seriously, when an explosive device detonated in a pizza parlor. The bomb exploded not far from a police station in the town of Laghouat, 250 kilometers south of Algiers.
A bomb exploded outside a Buddhist monastery.  There were no injuries.  Note: Muslim Separatists have been active in this region in the past.
Two Israeli women were injured by Palestinian gunfire in the West Bank city of Hebron.
A Palestinian gunman opened fire in an Israeli bus station, killing three Israelis.  The militant was apparently wearing an Israeli army uniform.  Fourteen people were injured before the gunman was shot and killed.
A child was slightly injured when two men threw a pipe bomb into the living room of a house in Newtownabbey.  The explosion, which is being blamed on the Ulster Defense Association (UDA), blew out all the windows in the room and embedded shrapnel into the roof and walls of the home.
Twelve settlers from Shafi Shamrun (near Nablus) set fire to fifty olive trees belonging to Burqa village after dousing the ground and the trees with gasoline.
A Palestinian suicide bomber killed himself and an Israeli in a passing car.  The car was destroyed on the road at the entrance to Kibbutz Shluhot, an Israeli agricultural collective five miles from the West Bank.
Shots were fired at Lavery's Pub in Belfast by unknown drive-by shooters.  Lavery's Pub is frequented by both Protestants and Catholics and by many local students.  The motive for the shooting is unknown.
A car bomb detonated in the Croat Isthmus.  One person was injured.  Social authorities do not know who was responsible; it may not be terrorist related.
Four Palestinian children were hospitalized after Israeli settlers attacked them as they were going home from school in Hebron.
An explosive device detonated in the centre of Prilep outside a caf, causing some damage but no casualties. No further information.
An attack, using aerosol sprays and burning petrol cans, was carried out on a military installation in Pau.  A group calling itself, Totally Anti-War Group (ATAG) claimed responsibility for the attack, which caused superficial damage.
The Ulster Defense Association (UDA) is blamed for throwing a blast bomb into the rear of a house on North Queen Street in north Belfast.  The blast was caused by two large fireworks.  The UDA is being accused of attempting to heighten tensions.
A Kentucky Fried Chicken outlet was bombed in Makassar, South Sulawesi.  Earlier, there had been anti-U.S. protests in Makassar.  Days earlier (8 October 2001), an Islamist group called Laskar Jundullah threatened to attack McDonald's, KFC, and Coca-Cola.Note:  Another bomb was discovered at the office of an Australian Insurance Company shortly after the Kentucky Fried Chicken blast.
A public revenue office, which was under construction, was the target of an unspecified attack in Bastia.  Note:  On 20 October an anonymous and unknown group claimed responsibility for this attack, accusing Prime Minister Lionel Jospin of seeking to mark time while awaiting the coming Presidential election.
Nine Palestinians were hospitalized after a truck driven by an Israeli settler deliberately drove into the Palestinians' taxi at the Sanjil checkpoint north of Ramallah.  One man died of his wounds.
An explosive device on a train in Assam bound for Delhi was discovered and disarmed.  Police suspect rebels of the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA).
Two activists of the Awami League, one a woman, were injured in a bomb attack on the office of the partys district unit in Sirajganj.
The hangar of a villa in the town of Doubs was damaged by an explosive device.  No further information is available.
A letter containing spores of anthrax was found addressed to Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle at his office in the Hart Building in Washington, DC.  Later,twenty-eight Senate staffers tested positive to exposure to anthrax spores.  The letter had been postmarked in Trenton, NJ.Four New Jersey postal workers, who worked in the facility from which the letters to Senator Daschle and Senator Leahy were postmarked, contracted skin anthrax.  Also going through this postal facility were anthrax-laced letters to the New York Post and NBC.Thomas L. Morris Jr. was diagnosed and later died of inhalation anthrax.  Morris was an employee of the Washington, DC Postal Service.  Another DC postal employee was also infected and died 22 October 2001 also of inhalation anthrax.  Two others of their colleagues were diagnosed with the same disease but survived.Anthrax spores were found in a Trenton area accounting firm that receives mail from a New Jersey Postal facility that had been contaminated by anthrax-laced letters.  Linda Burch, a bookkeeper at the firm, contracted cutaneous anthrax.Note: The injuries resulting from the contamination of the New Jersey postal facility are included under incident report 11980.
A timed improvised explosive device (IED) destroyed the offices of moderate Kosovo leader Ibrahim Rugova in southern Kosovo, but no one was injured in the attack.  The blast occurred at the offices of the Democratic League of Kosovo which are located in the town of Suva Reka, near Prizren.
Two pipe bombs targeted Catholic homes at the junction of Duncairn Gardens and Hallidays Road in north Belfast.  The Ulster Defense Association (UDA) is thought to be behind this attack.
Gunmen from the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) gained access to a hotel in Jerusalem and shot and killed a righ- wing Israeli minister with three bullets to the head and neck.  The assassination of Rehavam Zeevi was the first- ever assassination of a serving Cabinet minister by Palestinians.
A bomb exploded at the St. Elias Maronite Church, damaging the entrance but resulting in no casualties.  Authorities opened an investigation and stepped up security, but the perpetrators escaped without charge.On 2 November 2001 Interior Minister Elyas al-Murr stated that the person responsible for the explosion had been arrested and that he/she belonged to the terrorist organization Asbat al-Ansar.
An Israeli was injured in a shooting attack on his car near the West Bank town of Qalqilyah.  No information was given on the assailants.
Claire Fletcher, an employee of CBS was diagnosed with skin anthrax.  No other employees at CBS were found to have anthrax infections.
Unidentified attackers shot and killed two ethnic Albanians -- one of them a journalist --  in a drive-by shooting in Kosovo.  The attackers pulled alongside the vehicle in which the victims were riding and opened fire.  Thirty-nine rounds were fired.  A third man was injured in the shooting.
Johanna Huden, an employee of the New York Post was diagnosed with skin anthrax after she came into contact with a letter containing spores which had been postmarked from Trenton, NJ.  Later, Mark Cunningham, another New York Post employee, was also diagnosed with skin anthrax.Four New Jersey postal workers, who worked in the facility from which the letters to Senator Daschle and Senator Leahy were postmarked, contracted skin anthrax.  Also going through this postal facility were anthrax-laced letters to the New York Post and NBC.Anthrax spores were found in a Trenton area accounting firm that receives mail from a New Jersey Postal facility that had been contaminated by anthrax-laced letters.  Linda Burch, a bookkeeper at the firm, contracted cutaneous anthrax.Note: injuries resulting from the contamination of the New Jersey mail facility are included under incident report 11980.
A Serb journalist was badly wounded in Kosovo after gunmen fired at him through the window of his house.
Rebels from the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) killed six people in the village of El Habra.  No further details were given.
An improvised explosive device was found and made safe on a train between Rome and Avezzano.  The explosive device, found after an anonymous phone call, was hidden in an old television remote control left lying on a seat.
A bomb exploded in a policeman's home in Peol. The explosion killed the policeman, his wife, his child and two other civilians. Some reports suggest the device was left outside the building next to a hot dog stand. Authorities suspect that the National Liberation Army (ELN) is responsible for the attack.
A Palestinian man was shot by settlers in a drive-by shooting near Hebron.  The man was on his way home to Sayir from Hebron, where the driver of the car fired on him.
Militant from the National Democratic Front of Bodoland (NDFB) bombed a Hindu celebration, killing three people and wounding a dozen more.  The NDFB is seeking an independent homeland for the mostly Christian Bodo tribe.
An explosive device blew up near Shima'a junction in the Har Hebron area. There were no injuries or damage caused by the blast. No further detail were given.
A pipe bomb exploded after being thrown into the home of a Social Democrat and Labor Party (SDLP) councilor in Sutton Gardens, Londonderry.  There was damage to the front door, ceiling and walls in the hallway.  Loyalists are thought to be behind the attack which comes shortly after an Irish Republican Army (IRA) decision to decommission its weapons.
Police arrested a young man who was attempting to plant a homemade explosive device.  The police patrol had been passing through the area when the perpetrators began to run away.  The police found a device made up of three camping gas canisters, two bottles of inflammable liquid and a fuse.  It is unknown what the intended target was.
An Indian police official and a constable were killed when militants ambushed their vehicle setting off a command initiated improvised explosive device at a village in Kathua District of Jammu region.
A bomb exploded on a bus in Quetta killing at least three people and wounding twenty-five others.  The bomb, which was apparently placed under a seat, exploded as the bus moved through a market area in a subdivision where military personnel live.
IRNA reports that Jewish terrorists killed a Palestinian worker near Haifa.  Note: No other information on the attack was given.
Maoist guerrillas blew up a railroad station in the southern Andhra Pradesh state.   Armed rebels of the outlawed People's War Group (PWG) burst into Koneru railroad station, asked the staff on duty to evacuate and then exploded an improvised explosive device (IED) in the station.
Two Palestinian policemen-turned-Islamic Jihad (PIJ) members drove up to a midtown intersection in a stolen Jeep and opened fire on pedestrians.
An explosive device was placed at the home of political party (DS) chief Azgan Haklaj.  Another parliamentary representative also was staying at Haklaj's house.
Charles Folliard, a former loyalist prisoner, was shot and killed by two gunmen in Strabane.  Folliard served seven of fourteen years for attempting to kill a Catholic woman in 1990.  It is believed that the Continuity Irish Republican Army (CIRA) was responsible for the murder.
Suicide attackers of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) Sea Tigers rammed their vessels into a ship carrying fuel near Point Pedro.  At least five Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) boats carrying explosives were involved in the attack.  Voice of Tigers Radio reports that two of the attackers were women.  The attack was carried out in retaliation for an 2 October 2001 Sri Lankan Navy attack on a Sea Tiger Base.
An improvised explosive device was found and defused at the home of an Israeli naval officer in the Tel Aviv suburb of Raanana. The device was a remote controlled improvised explosive device (IED) and consisted of 5kg of homemade explosives in a fire extinguisher initiated by a mobile phone, all wrapped in a blanket.
A roadside bomb was discovered and safely defused in the Jordan Valley. The bomb was discovered close to the settlement of Beqa'ot.
In Renteria, a group of unknown individuals doused a Viajes Barcelo (travel agency) office with inflammable liquid and set it ablaze.  The flames damaged furniture that was in the office.
An explosion occurred in the Georgian Veterinarian Department's building in Tbilisi, damaging walls and the roof. The bomb was planted in a paper box next to the office of Department Chief Irakly Mosidze.   There were no casualties.
A firebomb was thrown at an Israeli vehicle near the village of Sinjil in the Ramallah area.  No one was injured, but the car was damaged.
A crude explosive device that had been left in the back garden of a home on Roseleigh Street in north Belfast was found by a group of children.  The device consisted of a firework with nails attached and was picked up and kicked around by the children before a parent realized it was an explosive.  Army bomb experts safely defused the device.
A car bomb exploded near the main rail station of Birmingham.  The explosion took place in a downtown district with crowded night clubs and cinemas.  Authorities said that they received a warning call from an Irish dissident group, probably the Real Irish Republican Army (RIRA).Note:  Two members of the RIRA were arrested and charged for this attack in November 2002.  In January 2003, the two men, James McCormack and John Hannan admitted to this attack as part of a RIRA bombing campaign.Note:  Three men, Aiden Hulme, Robert Maguire and Noel Maguire, were found guilty in April 2003 of masterminding a dissident republican bombing campaign that included this attack.
A hooded gang sprinkled a Kutxa cash machine in San Sebastian with inflammable liquid and set it alight.  The ATM was burnt out in the fire.  This is the second time in two days that a Kutxa ATM in San Sebastian has been destroyed by arsonists.
A grenade thrown at a newspaper office failed to detonate.  The paper had previously received death threats from a ruling party candidate; he was contesting the results of the December 5 parliamentary elections.
Two Israelis were killed and between 35 and 46 others were injured when a Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) gunman opened fire on a bus in the French Hill section of Jerusalem.  He was killed by Israelis at the scene.  Both Hamas and PIJ claimed the attack which was later determined to be a PIJ operation.
Five settlers from Ben Ikhayfar attacked farmers during the olive harvest near Hebron, injuring one who was hospitalized.
Gunmen fired on the Chechen Justice Department in Grozny.  One person was injured.  As is often the case, it is difficult to tell if this is truly a terrorist incident.
An explosive device exploded on the grounds of the Australian International School.  No injuries.
A chapel of the Serb Orthodox church was almost destroyed by explosives in a town south of Pristina. NATO-led peacekeepers stationed in Kosovo reported three separate explosions at the site late Thursday and said explosives were apparently placed against a wall of the chapel.  No one has claimed responsbility for the attack.
Israel Defense Forces (IDF) soldiers safely detonated an explosive charge that they discovered near Gadid in the Qatif Bloc of settlements in the Gaza Strip.
A group of armed men opened fire on security guards at Quetta's main airport.  The attackers escaped.  One security guard was killed.
A highly-explosive device, consisting of nails, flour and dynamite attached to a gas bottle, was left at the Nicosia home of Yiannis Papadopoulos, the publisher of the Politis newspaper.  The detonator of the bomb failed to ignite and no damage was caused.  Sources believe that the attack might have been an attempt to gag the media.
Three mortar shells were fired at an Israeli settlement in the Qatif Bloc in the Gaza Strip.  No one was injured, but several houses sustained damage.
Palestinian gunmen fired on a Border Police camp near Tulkarm.  No one was hurt.
Shots were fired on an Israeli car (probably a settler's car) north of Ganim settlement in the West Bank.  No one was hurt.
An Israeli woman who lived in Mevo Dotan settlement, was shot and killed while driving home from work in Shaked settlement  The al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades, the military wing of al-Fatah, claimed the attack and said it was in response to the Israeli killing of two of the group's leaders.
Two mortar shells were fired from the northern part of the Gaza Strip and exploded in Israeli territory.  No one was hurt, and no damage was caused.
A homemade explosive device, which failed to detonate, was found in the courtyard of the Spanish Consulate in Pau.  The device was made of a can and bottle containing petrol, a rudimentary ignition switch, a box of matches and a small fuse.  A man called the AFP office in Bayonne to claim responsibility for the attack as an action against the Spanish Consulate in Pau, against the fascist Spanish government and its French collaborators.  The man did not identify any group as responsible.
A number of petrol bombs were left outside a post office in Lequeitio by unidentified individuals.  The bombs started a small fire, which blackened the outside walls and windows of the office, and was extinguished by the fire brigades.
One person was killed and another wounded in a shooting attack at the entrance to Moshav Kefar Hess in the Tel Mond area.  The attacker left a note saying the attack was an act of retaliation.
Two separate bomb blasts killed two people and injured fourteen.  One bomb exploded in an electronics store.  Another bomb was hurled into a municipal truck, but the driver kicked it out.
A semi-retired journalist was gunned down in his home while watching soccer.  His nephew was also killed.  Authorities have not identified the perpetrators, but paramilitaries are suspected.  Four other journalists have been placed under federal protection this week after receiving death threats from a paramilitary group.
An explosion (possibly from a grenade) occurred at a Serbian political meeting in Zvecan, northern Kosovo. There were no casualties.  The explosion occurred at the entrance to the building, damaging two vehicles.
Ottilie Lundgren, a ninety-four-year-old, was diagnosed with inhalation anthrax.  She later died on 21 November 2001.  The source of her exposure still remains unclear.
A Catholic man was wounded in the hand by gunfire that was shot from a passing car in Clady.  As the car pulled by, the gunmen fired three shots at the victim.  Loyalist are being blamed for the attack.
An Israel Defense Forces (IDF) unit uncovered an explosive device near Al-Khidr in the Bethlehem area.  Bomb disposal experts safely defused it.
A petrol bomb exploded in the living room of a Catholic home on Serpentine Road in north Belfast.  The device damaged the living room but no one was injured.
A bomb exploded on Emile Botta Street in Jerusalem when a police bomb disposal expert handled it, but no one was hurt.  The bomb included a mortar shell.
A deputy chairman of the Islamic Rebirth Party of Tajikistan, Mirzoyusuf Fozilov, was seriously wounded in an attempt on his life in the northern Tajik town of Khojand.  The attackers, who were masked, escaped.  There is no information on their identities or origin.
Three residents of the West Bank settlement of Shavey Shomron were injured in a shooting attack near the settlement.
A small bomb exploded at the Universidad Catolica Boliviana.  A security guard was injured.  Another explosive device had been found and defused at the school a week earlier.
A large explosive charge was found in the Kfar Darom hothouses.  It was safely defused by soldiers.
An Israeli was slightly injured in a shooting attack on the Alon Road near the settlement of Ma'ale Mikhas.
A homemade resonance bomb detonated outside the window of a McDonalds fast food restaurant on Fevzi Plaza Street in Istanbul's Fatih neighborhood.  There were no reported injuries.
Suspected separatists from the Uygur Holy War Organization knifed and probably killed a judge and seriously injured his wife.
Property damage was caused when a mortar landed on a home in the Gaza Strip settlement of Neve Dekalim.  No one was injured.
There were no injuries, and only minor property damage occurred when the Jerusalem suburb of Gilo was fired upon.  It was unclear whether the weapon was a mortar or firearms.
East of Bethlehem, Palestinians fired a mortar shell at the settlement of Teqo'a and Noqdim.  No one was hurt, and no damage was caused.
An Indian leader claimed that the United Self Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) killed five Indian activists on a reservation near Rio Sucio west of Bogot.
The National Liberation Army (ELN) kidnapped eight people from a roadblock in Caldas Department.  Five of the hostages were freed hours later.
A pipe bomb was found at Holy Cross Primary school, a Catholic school that has been the center of recent protest.  Police defused the device, and children returned to classes.  Loyalist paramilitaries are being blamed for the attempted attack.
Two people were killed and about fifty wounded when two Palestinian gunmen opened fire on the market area in Afula.  The gunmen were killed by police and Israel Defense Forces (IDF) reservists who were on the scene.  Both the Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) and al-Fatah claimed the attack.
An Israeli woman was killed, and three other civilians were wounded in Gush Katif in Gaza when a Palestinian gunmen opened fire on the convoy in which they were traveling.  Israel Defense Forces (IDF) troops rushed to the scene, and the gunman was killed in the ensuing battle.  Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
An Israeli man was wounded in a shooting attack on his car near the village of Sinjil, located between Shilo and Ma'ale Levona in the West Bank.
A rocket was fired at a house in a settlement in the northern part of the Gaza Strip.
A French gendarme was shot (and later died) by a member of the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) at a checkpoint in Pau.  This is the second gendarme to be shot at this checkpoint during routine procedure.  In this case, the ETA perpetrator refused to stop at the checkpoint and riddled the premises with bullets on his way through.  He is through to have taken a prisoner when he crossed the Spanish border and switched vehicles.Note:  On 13 December ETA released a statement in which they deny having set up a new front in France, and call this attack an accident.
A suicide bomber blew himself up on a public bus close to a military camp near Hadera, killing himself and three others and wounding nine.  Both Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) and the al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade claimed responsibility for the attack which came on the 54th anniversary of the UN Partition Plan for Palestine.  The bomber was subsequently found to be a member of the Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ).
Palestinians fired two mortars at the Gaza Strip settlement Gush Katif.
Six men on motorcycles attacked a bus in Bocaya.  They forced the bus to stop, then shot and killed fifteen of the seventeen passengers.  Colombian authorities do not know which group -- paramilitaries or guerrillas -- is responsible.
Two People's War Group (PWG) members shot and killed a contractor.  No further information is provided.
The Free Aceh Movement (GAM) is blamed for an arson attack on a government run orphanage.  An elementary school was burned nearby at the same time.
Three people were injured in a shooting attack on Gilo.  The shots were fired from Beit Jala.
An Israeli was shot and critically wounded near the northern West Bank settlement of Kadim just east of Jenin.
Suspected Shining Path (SL) guerrillas bombed an electric tower near Lima.    A dynamite charge toppled the structure, but did not cause any power outages. Authorities have warned of increased rebel activity, and there are some suspicions that Shining Path guerrillas are planning attacks on US targets in Peru such as the Embassy.  Since October, police have been investigating seven acts of sabotage against towers in the Lima area belonging to the U.S.-owned electric company Luz del Sur.  Shining Path regularly bombed electric towers in the 1980s and early 1990s, plunging Lima and other cities into darkness.  Police said the techniques used in Sunday's blast were similar to ones used by the rebels in the past.
An Israeli resident of Ofra was slightly injured in an ambush shooting attack in Wadi al-Haramiyah near Ramallah.
A pipe bomb exploded on Hillman Street in north Belfast, almost injuring two teenagers who were in the area.  Authorities are blaming loyalists for throwing the device over the peace line in Duncairn Gardens.
A prominent Chechen public and political figure, Rizvan Lorsanov, was killed near his home in Novye Atagi.  A command-initiated improvised explosive device was used to attack him as he drove home in his car.
Two electricity pylons were dynamited in a rural area of San Rafael.  Six-hundred and forty-sever pylons have been attacked since 1999.  Of these, 542 have been repaired.
Palestinians fired three mortar shells at a settlement in the central Qatif Bloc in Gaza.  There were no casualties, and no damage was caused.
Masked attackers planted an improvised explosive device that detonated outside the Urnieta offices of the moderate Basque National Party (PNV).  The attack caused no injuries.
A low-powered charge exploded at a private home in Olmeta, about 60 km south of Ajaccio.  The blast caused some damage to the home.  The owners of this home have not been identified.
Three Molotov cocktails were thrown into the courtyard of a French police officer's house in Ascain.  The attack caused only material damage to the door and two cars parked in nearby areas.Note:  In a communique on 19 December 2001 in the Journal du Pays Basque, it was reported that the attack was carried out by Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) supporters to pay tribute to nationalist activist Aratz Gomez, members of ETA, and victims of the French police on three occasions.  These occasions were three shoot-outs between French genderarmes and suspected members of the underground organization over the last few weeks.
An Israeli girl was slightly wounded by a mortar shell fired at a Gush Katif settlement.
A bomb exploded at the Exxon/Mobil plant in Aceh.  A company representative reported that the explosion was minor and did not injure anybody or disrupt operations.
An explosive charge, that weighed 400 grams, exploded and damaged part of a building that belongs to Concept Informatique Mediterranean, a computer company in Mezzavia.  There were no reported injuries.
Security forces found and defused four improvised explosive devices which had been placed beneath oil tanks containing several tens of thousand tons of oil in a Grozneftegaz petroleum storage near the railway station of Chervlyonnaya-Uzlovaya.
A suspected suicide bomber died near the Sha'arei Ephraim settlement on the Green Line when the explosives he was wearing detonated prematurely.  Israeli security sources believe his intended target was the Kfar Sava mall inside Israel proper.
A remote-controlled bomb was placed on the road on which Murat Karayilan, one of the administrators of the Workers of Kurdistan (PKK) terrorist group, was traveling.  It is reported that Krayilan and one other man were injured in the attack which took place in Surade village.
A mortar shell landed in a Qatif Bloc settlement in the Gaza Strip.  No one was hurt.
No one was hurt when a gas canister which had been laid inside a fire exploded near Bayf Immar in the Hebron area.
Three policemen were wounded when unknown assailants threw an improvised explosive device through the window of the district internal affairs directorate of Makhachkala.
One man was killed and another wounded when an improvised explosive device exploded in a polling station in the eastern Siberian town of Krasnoyarsk two days before elections.  It is thought that the victims were planting the device when it exploded prematurely.  Another improvised explosive device detonated in a water pipe above the apartment of businessman and alleged mafia leader Pavel Struganov, a candidate for the post of deputy in the local parliament.  Police estimate the explosive charge was less than 0.5 kg and had possibly been placed in a sewerage pipe.
A group of hooded radicals threw petrol bombs at three bank branches in San Sebastian.  The perpetrators targeted a Kutxa bank and a Banco Santander in the Boulevard area and a Kutxa on San Juan Street.  All three banks had their cash machines destroyed by the attacks.
A car bomb exploded near a police headquarters and bank in Santa Cruz.  One person died (other reports suggest three), and seven were wounded.  A caller to a television station in Santa Cruz said a group called Mejores Dias Para Bolivia -- Better Days for Bolivia -- was responsible.  Police said they had never heard of the group and that the car bomb could be linked to Peruvian terrorists or drug traffickers.  Note:  One source states that the bank and police had been threatened with bomb attacks in the past couple of days.
The building that houses the magistrate's court in Elorrio was completely burnt out by a fire set by a group of arsonists.  Inflammable liquid was used to start the fire.  This building is also a historic landmark as the birthplace of the Saint Valenin de Berriotxoa.
An Israeli settler was wounded when Palestinians shot at his car as he was traveling along the road between Enar and Shavey Shomron settlements on the West Bank.  The settler fired back, killing one of the Palestinians.
A policeman was shot to death in Yala, one of five police shooting incidents in the same night.
An Israeli man was injured by shots fired from Jordanian territory near the border in the area between Yardena and Bet Yosef.
People's War Group (PWG) militants detonated an explosive at a train station, damaging the building.
Nine people were killed at a transmigrant camp in central Aceh.  Police blame the Free Aceh Movement (GAM).  GAM, however, blames Indonesian security forces.
People's War Group (PWG) members attacked a police sub-inspector at a market.  He was killed with an axe.  PWG activists also fired on the house of a legislator on the same day.
Three Palestinians armed with rifles and wearing explosives were shot and killed by Israeli soldiers as they attempted to cross from the Gaza Strip into Israel near Sederot.  Israeli security sources said a major suicide bomb mission had thereby been averted.
There was an attack on Grozny's Christmas/New Year's tree.  Perpetrators are unknown.  This attack is in the context of major Chechen armed actions against Russian/pro-Moscow forces.
An explosive device was detonated at the entrance of a branch of Bankoa-Credit Agricole [bank] in San Sebastian.  People inside were forewarned of the blast by two people who claimed to have planted the bomb.  No one was harmed, but there was slight building damage reported.
Four churches in Palu, Sulawesi, were bombed.  Two policemen were injured while attempting to defuse a bomb.
An explosion at 3:15 a.m. injured nine people in Barr, near Strasbourg.  The explosion was caused by a bomb placed outside the village hall where people were celebrating the New Year.  Earlier in the evening, another explosion destroyed an electrical transformer in the local sports stadium, plunging the community into darkness for an hour.  An explosion also occurred in the town on 29 December 2001.
A Catholic man was repeatedly stabbed in the face and head in north Belfast.  The Ulster Defense Association (UDA) is being blamed for this attack, which is a throw-back to the days when loyalists killed many Catholics in this manner.  Authorities believe the attackers lured the victim into the Tiger's Bay area (a loyalist section of town) by attacking his car and then allowing him to chase them there.  The UDA has rejected all suggestions that they were responsible.
Two explosive devices were found and safely defused north of the village of Ya'bad in the Janin area of the West Bank.
Three masked men attacked cars belonging to Danny O'Connor, a Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) politician who has spoken out against sectarian violence in the region.  The attackers smashed windows of the cars before fleeing.  O'Connor blames the Ulster Defense Association (UDA) for this attack.
The private car of a member of the Erzaintza (autonomous Basque police force) was set on fire in Bilbao after being doused with flammable liquid.  The car was completely destroyed, and a nearby car and house were damaged.
Gunmen broke in to the home of the Chechen regional agriculture minister and shot him to death.  In the same area, the chief of a local communications center was injured in a similar attack.
The mayor of Puerto Rico in Caqueta Department -- the closest municipality to the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) controlled demilitarized zone -- was attacked as he left his office at the end of the workday.  He was taken to the hospital where he later died of his injuries.  This is the third such attack in less than a year.
An Israeli was stabbed in the Armon Hanatzir promenade in Jerusalem by several masked men who fled immediately after the attack.
The private car of a retired member of the Ertzaintza (autonomous Basque police force) was set on fire after being doused with flammable liquid in Atxondo, in Vizcaya Province.  A car next to the retired policeman's car was also damaged.
A Catholic postman was shot to death as he arrived to work in Rathcoole, a Protestant area on the outskirts of northern Belfast.  The Red Hand Defenders, a front for the Ulster Defense Force (UDA), claimed the attack.
A car bomb detonated in a border town in north-eastern Colombia, injuring one person; the bomb also caused damage to buildings at a park near the international bridge connecting Cucuta to Venezuela.
The President of the Santa Rosa Municipal Council -- a leader of the indigenous community -- was kidnapped as he was traveling with his wife and children, forced back to his house to hand over some documents, and then shot and killed.  Enoc Samboni had received prior death threats and was in a government program to protect human rights defenders.
An Israeli man who also held US citizenship was taken from his car near the West Bank town of Beit Jalla and shot to death.  al-Fatah's military wing, the al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade claimed responsibility for the attack.Note: He was a settler, hence the classification of domestic incident.
A member of the police bomb squad was injured when dynamite placed in a bus exploded.  There are no further details on why he was in the bus.  The bus was straddling the Tibu-La Gabarra road in Norte de Santander Department.  A second vehicle, apparently containing explosives, was abandoned on Km 17 of the Ocana-Convencion road.
There was a bomb threat phoned into Odessa Airport, following the blast in the caf.  No explosive was found.  This is one of three Odessa incidents of that day.
Unidentified gunmen with automatic weapons shot at Ali Alavdinov, Chechnya's Deputy Prime Minister (of the pro-Moscow government).  The Deputy Prime Minister's chauffeur was critically wounded.
Two pylons in Casanare Department were dynamited, cutting off electricity to the entire department including Yopal.
Unidentified gunmen killed Kosovo MP Ismail Hajdaraj outside his home in Pec in the evening.  Hajdaraj was a member of Rugova's political party, the LDK.  The motive is unclear.  The report notes that there has been an increase in unspecified pressure on LDK officials recently.
Two Russian government workers (in the Federal Communications office) were shot, one killed.  This may be related to upcoming presidential elections in Ingushetia.
The Cano Limon-Covenas oil pipeline in Arauca Department was attacked.  No further information is provided.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) blew up the bridge connecting Villavicencio to the demilitarized zone (DMZ).  A car bomb went off, destroying the bridge and isolating nine towns -- three of which are in the DMZ.
Two banks, a branch of the BSCH and one of the BBVA, were set on fire in Berriz in Vizcaya Province.  In both cases, they were first doused with flammable liquid.  Major damage was caused to the BSCH as well as to some nearby vehicles and a shop.
Arlyn De la Cruz, a journalist famous for exclusive stories on Abu Sayyaf (ASG) was reported missing on 19 January 2002.  She was kidnapped and freed on 27 April 2002.  The Philippine authorities dispute De la Cruz's claim that her captors were ex-Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF) who had been integrated into the armed forces of the Philippines.  Authorities say she was held by Abu Sayyaf (ASG).
Two pylons were dynamited between Villavicencio and Restrepo.  They were pylons number 149 and 150.  Numbers 165, 166, and 167 were also toppled after being rebuilt (part of the El Guavio- La Reforma- El Tunal line in Cundinamarca Department).
Palestinians fired on the settlement of Pesagot near Ramallah.  No one was injured.
There was an attempt made on the life of the Interior Ministry head Lt. Gen. Kazbeck Dzantiyev. The source notes that ...people in the Republic link the attempted terrorist act to the upcoming North Ossetian presidential election.  Dzantiyev: This means that political opponents of the incumbent authorities [the leading opposition candidate recently had his registration revoked by the North Ossetian Supreme Court] have switched from statements and threats to direct actions.
Several shots were fired at an Israeli bus near Bet El in the West Bank.  No one was injured.
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) destroyed two pylons in Meta Department.
The first deputy mayor of Makhachkala (Akhmed Aliyev) and his wife were found shot to death in their house; the assailants appeared to be outside the house.  Makhachkala is the capital of the sourthern Russian republic of Dagestan.  This may be a political war between two Dagestan constituencies and not a terrorist attack.  A Russian publication, on the other hand, blames Wahhabite mafia.
Daniel Pearl, South Asia Bureau Chief for the Wall Street Journal, was kidnapped in Karachi on 23 January 2002 while investigating possible links between shoe-bomber Richard Reid and extremist Sunni groups in Southwest Asia.  A previously unknown group calling itself The National Movement for the Restoration of Pakistani Sovereignty claimed responsibility and demanded the release of the former Taliban ambassador to Pakistan, better treatment for the detainees in Cuba, and the release of the Pakistani prisoners there.  Sheikh Omar Saeed, one of the leaders of Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) was arrested on 12 February 2002 and confessed to the kidnapping; he later retracted his confession, but JeM and its parent group Harakat-ul-Mujahedin (HUM) are nevertheless believed to have been behind the kidnapping and killing.  A video tape showed his throat being slit, but Pearl was probably already dead from a wound to the chest.  He is believed to have been killed on or around 30 or 31 January 2002.
Russian sappers found and disarmed an explosive device apparently left by Chechen separatists.
Shots were fired at Jerusalem's Gilo neighborhood.  No one was hurt.
The United Self Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) killed eight peasants and indigenous people in Valle.  The bodies were dressed in military forces uniforms and rubber boots.
Twenty-six people were injured when a suicide bomber blew himself up on the corner of Neve Sha'aran and Bnei Brak streets in south Tel Aviv near the old central bus station.  Police also found a Kalashnikov rifle nearby.
Two television booster stations on Arnotegi Hill near Bilbao were doused with petrol and set on fire.
A bomb planted in a restaurant toilet at Istanbul's Haydarpasa Train Station exploded but caused no casualties.  Security forces arrived, searched the station and found a second bomb which was safely defused.
A female suicide bomber detonated a belt filled with explosives in downtown Jerusalem, killing one person and the bomber and wounding more than 150. The dead victim was identified as Pinhas Tokatli. This was the second suicide bombing in Israel in the past 48 hours and the first bombing carried out by a female suicide bomber. The attack was claimed by a military wing of the Fatah movement led by Arafat.  Among those injured was US citizen Mark Sokolow, who also survived the World Trade Center attack on September 11, 2001.  The bomber was identified as Shinaz Amuri, a student at Nabluss A-Najah University.
A man threw a grenade into a store.  A suspect is in custody, but the motive for the attack is not known.
An Israeli was stabbed by two Palestinians in Elon More east of Nablus.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) is suspected of carrying out a car bomb explosion in Florencia.  The attack caused 5 civilian deaths, 40 injuries and major damage to 7 housing blocks in Florencia.
Shots were fired on the Gilo neighborhood of Jerusalem.  No one was hurt.
One person was injured and a car damaged when two mortars were fired at the Gaza settlement of Neve Dekalim in the morning.  A third mortar was fired at the settlement during the afternoon, injuring no one.
A bomb exploded at a marketplace near a bus stop in Riasi in the district of Udhampur, 85 kilometres (53 miles) east of Jammu, Kashmir's winter capital,  injuring six people and killing four.
Maoists hung two bombs from anti-monarchy banners strung across city streets.  Security forces defused the bombs on 3 February 2002.  Earlier on 2 February 2002, six bombs were discovered and deactivated in Kathmandu, including four at the bus station.
An explosive charge was discovered and safely detonated in a controlled explosion near Sebastia in the Nablus area.
Shots were fired at an Israeli bus east of the Tapuah junction south of Nablus.  No one was hurt, but the bus was damaged.  The bus was accompanied by a military vehicle.
Border Police bomb disposal experts safely dismantled an explosive charge discovered near Rafah in the Gaza Strip.
Shots were fired from the direction of Isawiyah at an Egged bus traveling on the Ma'ale-Jerusalem road.  No one was hurt.
A rickshaw puller was killed by a bomb thrown from a moving vehicle.  The incident occurred near the Chittagong Press Club where a prominent journalist was scheduled to appear.  The journalist, Shahriar Kabir, had been imprisoned for sedition and released in January.  A little known group had threatened to disrupt the reception for Mr. Kabir.
Shots were fired at a car driven by an Israeli near Avney Hafetz in the Tulkarm area of the West Bank.  No one was hurt, but the car was damaged.
A bus owned by the Municipal Tram Company of San Sebastian was set on fire with flammable liquid after ten unknown individuals forced the driver and five passengers to leave the vehicle.
Basque police report that a home made device detonated at the Renfe Station in Vizcaya Province, damaging the ticket machines and roof and breaking glass in the station.
An explosive charge primed to explode when farmers started operating the irrigation system, detonated in the fields of Moshav Ram-on near Mount Gilbo'a.  No one was hurt.
Unidentified gunmen entered some houses in Shiva, near Sopur, and forced the inhabitants out.  The gunmen then opened fire on them, injuring three people.
An Israeli couple was attacked by four or five masked teenaged Palestinians in south Jerusalem near the Armon Hanatziv promenade.  The woman later died of her wounds while one of the Palestinian boys collapsed and died during his arrest.  Israeli police deny any abuse while an Arab eyewitness said they beat the boy and shot him in the hand and foot.  The autopsy showed the boy had been shot in the anus.
Basque police report that three parked train carriages in the Euskotren station were set on fire with flammable liquid by a group of unidentified individuals.
A vehicle carrying a local Congress leader was stopped by militants in Maharashtra.  Other occupants of the leader's vehicle were ordered to return while the leader was shot to death.  The People's War Group (PWG) is suspected.
Shots were fired at Border Police and at workers building the Trans-Israel Highway near Tulkarm in the West Bank.  No one was hurt.
Five power pylons in Northern Santander were blown up, hampering electricity services.  Authorities attribute the attack to the National Liberation Army (ELN).
An explosive went off near the car of a top police official in southern Russia in what appeared to be the second unsuccessful attempt on his life in less than a month.  Kazbek Dzantiyev, the Interior Minister of the Northern Ossetia region, was getting into his car outside his home in the capital Vladikavkaz when the explosion occurred.  Dzantiyev suffered a light concussion and one of his bodyguards was wounded with metal fragments from the explosive.  Dzantiyev was also targeted in a bomb attack outside his home on 20 January 2002.
An improvised explosive device on a clockwork mechanism was rendered safe when found under a stairway on the second floor of a school in Urus Martan.  EOD sources claim the device was defused with an hour to spare on the timer.
Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) militants in search of a police officer instead killed the officer's father.  The victim was kidnapped and mutilated before being thrown from a hill top.
Shots were fired at Homesh settlement.  No one was hurt.
A land mine, apparently aimed at the head of Grozny's countryside district, went off a fragment of a second late.
Palestinians fired shots at the settlement of Homesh in the West Bank.  No one was hurt.
Two bombs placed in garbage cans exploded at a market in Jolo.  Police suspect that either the Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG) or the Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF) is responsible.
Shots were fired at a Border Police base in Tulkarm.  No one was hurt.
An explosion at a construction site near Bujanovac destroyed a pipe prepared for building a local water supply system.  The explosion was blamed on Albanian groups.
Shots were fired on Gilo, causing damage to several apartments and car windows but injuring no one.
An incendiary cocktail thrown at a BSCH bank branch failed to explode.  This is one of four reported attacks on offices in Aquilino Arriola St. in Sopelana on this day.(See incidents # 9387, 9388 & 9390.)
A bomb exploded in the road to Mount Eval near Nablus.  No one was injured.
A couple from Avnei Hefetz was wounded when Palestinians opened fire on their car 500 meters from the Green Line near Tulkarm.
A limpet bomb planted in the car of Eduardo Madina Munoz, a member of the Young Socialists of the Basque Country (JSE), exploded and caused serious injuries to his leg. Note:  In a communiqu sent to the Basque daily Gara on 4 April 2002, the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) claimed responsibility for this attack.
The Maoist Communist Center (MCC) blew up a rail line, causing a train derailment.  The attack came during a strike called by MCC and People's War Group (PWG) to protest against the Prevention of Terrorism Ordinance.  The incident took place in Giridh District, Jharkhand.
Colombia's second largest oil pipeline, the Cano-Limon, was again bombed by rebels.  According to Ecopetrol, this was the 14th attack on the pipeline this year.  The line is targeted by both the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) and the National Liberation Army (ELN) as part of an extortion campaign.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) hijacked an airplane, forcing it to land on a road near Hobo.  The guerrillas abducted one passenger, Senator Jorge Gechen Turbay.  All other passengers and crew were released.  The Colombian government then broke off talks with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC).
Three mortars were fired at the Gush Qatif settlement in the Gaza Strip.  No one was hurt.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) carried out an attack on a Telecom (National Enterprise for Telecommunications) tower, leaving Melgar, Chinauta, Pandi, Venecia, and 14 other municipalities in Tolima and Cundinamarca without telecommunication service.
In the border area of Abdullian, shots were fired during voting for the Jammu Lok Sabha from Pakistan.  No injuries were reported.
A pipe bomb, similar to one found the day before on the main Belfast to Londonderry road, was found on the grass verge on the A29 Cookstown to Moneymore road.  Authorities are blaming loyalists who are trying to derail the peace process for both attempted attacks.
An Israeli was killed when his car was shot at from a passing vehicle on the West Bank road between Atarot and Giv'at Ze'ev, north of Jerusalem.  The al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade claimed the attack.
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) is alleged to have poisoned the water supply of Pitalito.  A subsequent report (El Tiempo 28 February 2002) indicates the water is contaminated by heavy metals.
Basque police report that two cash dispensers were set on fire at the Guipuzcoa San Sebastian Kutxa savings bank.
Ingrid Betancourt (a former senator, an outspoken FARC critic, and presidential candidate from the Small Green Oxygen Party) and her campaign manager, Clara Rojas, were abducted by suspected Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) rebels. They, along with three men (2 Colombians and a French photographer on assignment for Marie Claire), were traveling to San Vicente del Caguan, the main town inside a rebel zone the government began attacking last week.  The three men were detained for several hours and later released.
Unidentified individuals set fire to a car that belonged to a member of the Basque police force in Vizcaya Province.  The car was completely burned out.
Two Israelis were wounded in a shooting attack near the settlement of Ateret north of Ramallah when Palestinians apparently ambushed their car in the Abud bypass road.  The Palestinians Popular Army Vanguards- Battalions of the Return claimed the attack.
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) rebels downed a nearby utility tower and blacked out the former rebel town of Vista Hermosa.
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) rebels detonated a bomb in a reservoir in Bogot.  According to Eduardo Barcena, the chief engineer for the water company, there were minor damages.
An Israeli was wounded when shots were fired at his car near the settlement of Karmel in Har Hevron.
Shots were fired at an Israeli car near the West Bank settlement of Shim'a. No one was hurt.
A pipe bomb was found in the garden of a house on Castletown Road in Ballynure.  Police discovered the device after they received a telephone warning.  Ballynure is typically not subjected to these types of attacks.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a civilian at Mathihandu in the Kokernag area of Islamabad district.
Shots were fired at a Border Police base near Tulkarm.  No one was injured.
A man who had been trained in Afghanistan and had been a member of banned Pakistani Jihadi groups slit the throat of a Shi'ite neighbor, citing religious differences after turning himself in to the police.  The attack took place in Kashmir Park, Shahdara, near the city of Lahore.
Two mortars were fired from the Palestinian Authority at the center of the Qatif Bloc settlements in Gaza.  There were no reports of injury.
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) blew up a power substation in Arauca.  No further information is provided.
Unidentified persons threw two grenades into the offices of the FRY President's party (DSS) in Belgrade, Serbia.  This could be a political squabble or a matter of Serbian nationalists who are aggrieved about Milosevic's trails in the Hague.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed seven Afghan tribal elders in eastern Kunar province who had attended a meeting of a commission planning to hold a Loya Jirga.  On their way back, they were ambushed in Pashad village, eighteen miles from the provincial capital of Asadabad.
Six mortar shells were fired at an unidentified Gaza settlement over the course of the evening.  No injuries were reported.
Palestinians fired on two Israeli cars, including one armored police patrol car, near the Makkabim roadblock on the Jerusalem-Modi'in road.  No one was hurt.
A bomb exploded against an Israeli vehicle south of Qalqilyah.  No one was hurt.
Nine people were killed and another forty-five wounded when a suicide bomber blew himself up in Jerusalem's ultra-Orthodox neighborhood of Bet Yisra'el, close to the US Consulate in East Jerusalem.  Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade claimed the attack.
Shots were fired at a Border Police base near Tulkarm.  No one was injured.
Shots were fired at a convoy of cars on the Qarni-Netzarim road.  No one was hurt, but one of the cars was damaged.
The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) discovered and safely detonated an explosive device near the Rafah crossing.
Two blasts occurred at the headquarters of the Guards Battalion of the Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) Political Bureau.  At least sixteen members of the Battalion were injured, and the building was damaged.
Palestinians fired shots at an Israeli car near the Tarqumiyah roadblock west of Hebron.  No one was hurt.
Anthony Rice, a Catholic teenager was stabbed in the back as he left a shopping center in north Belfast.  The perpetrators fled to the loyalist Tiger's Bay area after stabbing Rice a single time.  Authorities are calling this an unprovoked sectarian attack.
One person was killed and three injured in Afula's central bus station when a suicide bomber blew himself up on an almost-empty bus headed from Upper Nazareth to Tel Aviv.  The Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) claimed the attack, a response to the Israeli attack on Ramallah the day before.
Shots were fired at an Israeli car near Talmon west of Ramallah.  No one was hurt.
A power substation was attacked in Valle del Cauca province, leaving 32,000 people without electricity.  Authorities attribute the attack to the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC).
Molotov cocktails were thrown at the Spanish Radio and Television (RTVE) office, setting fire to the building but causing minimal damage to the building.  An RTVE security guard who tried to put out the fire was wounded.
A suicide bomber blew himself up in the lobby of the Eshel Hasharon hotel in the West Bank settlement of Ariel.  Fourteen people were injured, and the hotel was damaged. The military wing of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP), the Martyr Abu-Ali Mustafa Battalions claimed the attack.
Palestinians fired shots at a Border Police Jeep north of Jerusalem.  No one was injured.
A local government official and his driver were gunned down by unidentified assailants in Afghanistan's southern Helmand province -- a former stronghold of the Taliban.  The official was in charge of Nad Ali district 30 kms northwest of Lashkargah, the provincial capital.  He and the driver were on the road when their vehicle was shot at.  The incident date is not definite.
Border Police shot and killed a Palestinian carrying explosives in the Beit Hanina neighborhood of north Jerusalem.  He was reportedly trying to detonate the explosives at the time.
An explosive device detonated at the French entrance to the Mont Blanc tunnel, causing no injuries but destroying a maintenance truck.  The 7.4-mile passage linking France and Italy has been closed since March 1999 and was expected to reopen to cars on the day of the attack.  No one has claimed responsibility for this attack.Note:  The tunnel was attacked twice last year by activist groups opposed to truck traffic.
Two pipe bombs were found and made safe between a railway station and shops in Whitehead, Co Antrim.  Authorities blame loyalist paramilitaries for planting these bombs.
One Israeli was injured in a shooting attack at an Ashdod banquet hall.  The two shooters were wearing Israel Defense Forces (IDF) uniforms.
Maoists bombed a Nepal telecommunications corporation repeater station.  The report notes that more than fifty repeater stations have been destroyed.
Palestinians fired seven mortars on a settlement in the northern Gaza Strip, injuring no one.  Israel Defense Forces (IDF) soldiers returned fire and killed one Palestinian.
Three people were killed in North Karachi's Sector 5 area when several unidentified gunmen entered a house and fired on its occupants.
An Israeli from the city's Jewish enclave was stabbed by a Palestinian in Hebron.  The attacker fled the scene.
A police officer was killed in Yala.  Four other officers were killed by gunmen in similar attacks that night.
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) rebels dynamited a bridge that connects Huila and Putumayo Departments.  It is reported that they booby-trapped the road between Pitalito and Mocoa, leaving behind gas cylinders filled with dynamite.
A bank ATM was damaged by an improvised explosive device in Getxo.  The device was constructed from a gas cylinder and a bottle of petrol.
There was an apparent assassination attempt against a parliamentary candidate running for election.  Motive is unclear.
One Israeli was killed and another sixteen injured when a gunman opened fire on pedestrians at the western entrance to Kfar Sava.  The attacker was gunned down and killed by police and a civilian.  Al-Fatah's al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades claimed the attack.
Basque police report that a group of hooded individuals forced a bus driver out and then set fire to the parked city bus in the Araballa district.
A Palestinian known to be a collaborator was shot and killed in the village of Haris in the West Bank.
A Molotov cocktail was thrown at an Israeli car near the National Police headquarters in Jerusalem.  There were no casualties.
Shots were fired at an Israeli bus on the Qarni-Netzarim road.  No one was injured.
A mortar landed in the Occupied Territories near the border fence west of the southern town of Sederot.  No injuries were reported.
An explosive device filled with lead balls was thrown at the police station in Clichy-la-Garenne in Hauts-de-Seine department, causing damage to the windows.  According to the police, there have been incidents directed against police cars in Clichy-la-Garenne for several days.
A bomb made from a 40-mm (M-79) round, contained in a brown envelope addressed to House and Senate Representatives, was found and defused in Makati.  It was the second of two bombs found that night to be accompanied by a five-page manifesto from the Indigenous People's Federal Army (IPFA).
A woman was killed by militants in Rajouri district.  No further information is provided.
An bomb was thrown at an Islamic Assembly building in Janja (in heavily-Orthodox Serb Republic).  This was likely connected to refugee return and an earlier targeting of a mosque in Kozarska Dubica.  Perpetrators unclear.
Police say a bomb was found under the seat of a motorcycle outside a caf in Narathiwat.  The bomb was made from power gel and failed to explode because its timer had stopped.
A civilian was shot and injured by militants in downtown Srinagar.
Seven people were killed, including four Israel Defense Forces (IDF) soldiers, and another twenty-seven wounded when a suicide bomber blew himself up on an Egged bus in Wadi Ara near the Israeli Arab town of Umm al-Fahm.  Several Israeli Arabs were among the dead.  The Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) al-Quds Squads claimed the attack.
Shots were fired at an Israeli car near the village of Salim in the Janin area.  No one was hurt.
Two Corsican nationalists were killed and one wounded outside a bar in the town of Ile Rousse.  One of the Corsican nationalists, Jean-Michel Rossi, is the former leader of the Nationalist group Cuncolta Nazionalista and is the former editor of the group's newspaper U Ribumbu.  The identity of the other Corsican nationalist is unknown.
An unidentified place of worship was damaged when militants lobbed a grenade at the building at Dhaleri near Kalakote in Rajouri district.  No injuries were reported.
A suicide bomber blew himself up in downtown Jerusalem at the junction of King George Street and Agrippas, killing two and wounding at least sixty others.  One of the wounded later died of the injuries sustained during the attacks.  Al-Fatah's al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades claimed the attack, and in addition to being a member of the Brigades, the bomber was a Palestinian Authority policeman.
A firebomb was thrown at a bus near Hebron.  No one was injured.
A teacher was shot and killed in Narathiwat.  Police deny the killing is linked to the recent police murders, but local teachers believe separatists may be responsible.
Eight studio flats in Prunelli di Fiumorbu (Haute-Corse department) were destroyed by an explosive device.  No one has claimed responsibility for the attack.
A home-made bomb detonated, injuring five people.  Police say that the bomb detonated during clashes between Catholics and Protestants in Belfast.
An explosive device detonated near the buildings that house the offices of the Attorney General and Prosecutor General in Arauca Department.  Heavy property damage in Saravena's commercial areas was reported.
An explosive charge was detonated against a civilian bus between Mevo Dotan and Hermesh in the West Bank.  No one was hurt, and no damage was caused.
Explosives were found and defused in an apartment house in Tula.  Explosive design suggests skilled professional.  The target and motive is unclear.
A bomb exploded in a ground floor washroom of the Gorkhapatra newspaper office.  The Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (CPN-M) have been blamed for the attack.
Police recovered the bullet-ridden body of an unidentified person from Matribugh in the Shopian area of Pulwama.
Army explosive experts defused seven gas cylinder bombs found in rural Arauquita (Arauca Department), 100 meters from the Araucan section of the Cano-Limon Covenas pipeline.  Authorities attribute the attack to the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC).
Gas cylinder shells were launched at the mayor's office, the courts, a law office, and the public prosecutor's office in Arauca Department, causing injuries to two and destroying the buildings.  Authorities attribute the attack to the 45th Front of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC).
Shots were fired at the settlement of Kfar Darom in the Gaza Strip.  No one was hurt.
Unidentified gunmen shot a former counter-insurgent and collaborator at Pampore.
Shots were fired in a town in Northern Corsica.  This attack follows a shooting at a police station in Bastia.  There are no further details.
A group of armed militants entered the house of a National Conference activist in Rajpora village in Rajwaar belt and, not finding the National Conference man, shot his son and mother, killing the boy and wounding the woman.  The militants then raided the house of another National Conference activist and shot him to death.
The Deputy Director of Balochistan's Public Relations Department was gunned down by unknown assailants near Dhadar, 140 km from Quetta in Southwest Pakistan.Note:  The murder could be due to a land dispute; as such, the incident may not have been a terrorist attack.
Two explosive attacks on the Protoquimicos Company, a chemical firm, caused heavy damage but no casualties.  The first explosion occurred at the company's offices in downtown Medellin.  The second explosion occurred at the company's warehouse in Cristo Rey neighborhood.
Shots were fired at security guards patrolling the settlement of Eli in the West Bank.  No one was hurt.
Eight explosive devices were placed in Khara, Panja, and Khark villages -- most near high tension towers -- and detonated almost simultaneously.  One soldier and one civilian were injured.
Armed members of Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) attacked the Raghunath Temple in Jammu, first opening fire on the policemen at the gate (killing two) and then lobbing a grenade at worshippers and security personnel.  A total of ten people were killed -- four (Indian) security force personnel, four civilians, and two suspected militants -- in the initial attack and the shooting battle that ensued.  Another twenty-one people were injured, mostly civilians. LeT did not officially claim the attack, though the Indian press identified the perpetrators as LeT men.  A call was placed to newsmen claiming the attack on behalf of an unspecified Islamic Front to avenge Indian treatment of Muslims.
Fifteen people were killed and at least forty-six injured when a suicide bomber blew himself up in Haifa's Matza restaurant.  The establishment, in the city's Neveh Sha'anan neighborhood, is owned by Jews but run by Israeli Arabs.  The military wing of Hamas -- the Izz-al-Din al-Qassem Brigades -- claimed the attack, citing retaliation for the Israeli incursion into Ramallah.
There was a shooting incident in Gush Katif in Gaza.  No injuries were reported, and no further information available.
The Las Animas Bridge, located between the municipalities of Jagua de Ibirico and Chiriguanca, was completely destroyed.  Authorities attribute the attack to the 41st Front of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC).
Two masked gunmen shot and killed a suspected collaborator in a car parked just off Manger Square in Bethlehem.
Shots were fired at an armor-plated civilian bus at Ziff Junction south of Hebron.  No one was hurt.
An Israeli died of wounds received in a shooting attack near Har Homa.  He was shot by a Palestinian in Beit Sahur.
A National Conference leader, Ghulam Mohiuddin Dar was shot by militants at point-blank range and died instantly.  The attack took place in his house in the village of Kachumugam in the Baramulla district of north Kashmir.
An explosive device was activated next to an Israeli vehicle near the West Bank settlement of Pney Hever south of Hebron.  No one was hurt.
Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (CPN-M) rebels kidnapped six members of a lawmaker's family.  The Minister of Parliament's family was abducted from the hill district of Kalikot.
Unidentified people beat a civilian to death at Jablipora Bijbehara in Islamabad.
A fire at the Cavel International horse-slaughtering plant in De Kalb, Illinois caused $3.8 million in damage.  Authorities have not concluded the weapon used, the perpetrators or the motive for the fire.  However, back in 1997, a horse plant in Redmond, Oregon, owned by Cavel International was burned down and quickly claimed by the Animal Liberation Front (ALF).
The body of a suspected collaborator was found the day after he was abducted from his home at Shatgam Rajwar in the Handwara area.
Approximately 30 rebels from the Jose Manuel Martinez Quiroz Front of the National Liberation Army (ELN) kidnapped nine people in northern Cesar Department.  Among those abducted, four are contractors for Electricaribe (Caribbean Electricity Enterprise) and one is a merchant from Codazzi.  Note:  On 10 April 2002, ELN released the following three Electricaribe employees to the International Committee of the Red Cross Commission: Maria Angelica Salazar, Gabriela Aragon, and Gabriel Gonzalez.  ELN also issued a communiqu calling for a forum to be held, electricity rates to be frozen for six months, debt forgiveness for poor customers on the Atlantic Coast, and the suspension of service cuts.
Authorities blame the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) for planting a large explosive device near the trans-Ecuadorian pipeline (SOTE).  The Ecuadorian Army found the bomb near the Lago Agrio Aguarico stretch of the pipeline in the Amazon region close to the border with Colombia.
Authorities blame the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) for an attack on the Cano Limon pipeline, ending a 42-day streak of pumping for the often bombed duct.  This was the 16th bombing of the pipeline so far this year.
A powerful bomb exploded at the rear of a shop in the main Bazaar of Kohlu township in Marri Tribal Agency.  The shop was destroyed, but no one was hurt.
An explosive device was found under a casino (The Derby) in Mostar.  It is said by the Bosnian Croat People's Party to be terrorist related, but it could also be a financial or organized-crime motive.
Two bombs exploded in Villavicencio (Meta Department).  The first bomb was a medium-size device that exploded in the La Grama area where various restaurants, bars, and discos are located. Eight minutes later a second bomb, a car bomb loaded with 100 kg of potassium hydrochloride, exploded.  At least twelve were killed and seventy injured in this attack that also caused heavy property damage to the Super Radio Network headquarters,  thirty homes, and fifteen vehicles.  Authorities attribute the attack to the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC).
A man was shot by unidentified gunmen at Iqbal Nagar, Surankote (Poonch).
A remote-controlled bomb exploded near a convoy carrying Afghan Defense Minister General Mohammed Qasim Fahim, killing four and wounding sixteen others (mostly school children and other locals lining the street) to welcome Fahim to Jalalabad.  Fahim had been on his way to the Governor's House from the airport; he escaped unhurt.
Militants lobbed a hand grenade at the ancestral home of the Minister for Works, Ali Mohammad Sagar, at Nawab Bazar in Srinagar.  He no longer lives in the house.
Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (CPN-M) rebels damaged a Pontoon bridge over the Karnali River, cutting off transportation to eleven villages in Bardia.
Two improvised mortars were fired at the Presidential Palace in Bogot.    One landed on a house, and one may not have launched, but the details are not clear.  The mortars were fired from a convertible jeep found in an alley nearby.  Authorities attribute the attack to the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC).
A group of armed men entered a house in Nagnidanda village in Gando area and opened fire, killing five inhabitants and wounding four.
Two men hired by the Democratic Karen Buddhist Association (DKBA) threw grenades at a gas station in Mae Sot.  The station is owned by a member of a rival insurgent group, the Karen National Union (KNU).
Unidentified gunmen forced entry into a house in Tazipora in Kulgam and shot to death the owner's two sons who worked as informers.
Authorities blame the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) for dynamiting the Bogot-Villavicencio bridge.  No further information is provided.
A natural gas truck exploded next to an historic synagogue on the island of Djerba off the coast of Tunisia.  The Islamic Army for the Liberation of the Holy Sites (IALHS, an Al-Qaeda- affiliated group sent claims of responsibility to several London-based Arab papers, including Al-Quds, Al-Arabi, and Al-Hayat.  German authorities detained a man suspected of acting as a point of contact for the attack.Note:  On 7 March 2003, five people were arrested in Spain as suspects who were supporting al-Qaeda's financial network and providing funds for this attack.  Authorities believe that money from these five suspects was used to buy materials and finance hideouts for the perpetrators of this attack.Note:  On 5 April 2003, a German man who had been under investigation in connection with this attack was arrested in Saudi Arabia.  Christian Ganczarski left Germany a year before after there was not enough evidence to prosecute him.  He is suspected of having strong ties to Osama Bin Laden.
No one was injured when shots were fired from a passing car at an Israeli factory near the Erez crossing in northern Gaza.
Police may have foiled a terrorist attack in central London on the day of the Queen Mother's funeral.  A police officer spotted a suspicious car which sped off and was later found abandoned.  The car's license plate was from Northern Ireland and had empty fertilizer bags in the back.  Fertilizer car bombs have been used in the area in recent years.
Unidentified gunmen shot and injured a former militant in Pulwama district.  He died in the hospital soon after.
Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (CPN-M) rebels bombed a Coca-Cola factory after taking its security guard hostage in Gondrang.
A bomb fixed to a three-wheel vehicle exploded near a bridge linking Myawaddy to Mae Sot in Thailand.  Thai police believe the bomb was remote detonated.  The same source notes that the explosion took place just 20 meters from a Burmese Army checkpoint.  Two rival insurgent groups, the Karen National Union and the Democratic Karen Buddhist Army (DKBA), are suspected in the blast.
Authorities defused a car bomb parked near Macheta.  No further information is provided.
Israel Defense Forces (IDF) soldiers discovered a large explosive charge on the border fence south of the Qarni checkpoint.  The bomb was safely dismantled.
A series of six explosions went off in Lucane on 17 April 2002.  The motive and target are unclear, although village residents blame the explosions on the police, and police blame the incidents on infiltrators from Kosovo.  A multi-ethnic police facility was damaged in the attack.
The mayor of Buynaksk, Abakar Alayev, was the target of a failed assassination attempt -- the use of an explosive device against his motorcade vehicle.  One report notes several attempts have been made on his life.  The same report points at Wahhabists in Buynaksk as potential assailants but notes there are no definitive answers for the motive or assailant.
At least three people were killed and two injured when an explosion struck the main bazaar in Khost near the city's military hospital.
An explosive device went off at the Chambacu Intelligence Building, leaving one dead and one injured.  No further information is provided.
A Palestinian drew a knife and tried to stab policemen near Umm al-Fahm in the village of Anin.  The policemen opened fire and killed him.
Unidentified attackers torched the house of the village headman in Doolipora in Vilgam area of Kupwara district.  The headman was reported to be a National Conference activist.
Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) have been blamed for destroying the home of the Finance Minister in a bomb attack.
An explosive device went off at the Electrocosta Company headquarters.  No further information is provided.
A National Conference leader escaped an attempt on his life when militants attacked his house in Kupwara district's Hutmulla village, firing shots and lobbing grenades.  No one was injured.
A bank employee was injured when militants fired on him in Chatroo village in Kishtwar tehsil in Doda district.
Militants killed a civilian at Gambir Mughlan village in Rajouri district.
Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (CPN-M) rebels destroyed a Nepal Telecommunications Corporation substation in Kailali.  The attack comes amid widespread violence in the run-up to a general strike called by Maoist rebels.
A bomb planted on a motorized tricycle exploded near a department store, killing 15 people.  News reports suggest four possible perpetrators, including local gangsters, the Indigenous People's Federal Army (IPFA), Abu Sayyaf (ASG), and terrorists connected to Father Rohman Al-Ghozi, an Indonesian who pled guilty to explosives possession in General Santos city.  Two other blasts occurred elsewhere in General Santos shortly after this attack.
Masked Palestinians shot and wounded three suspected collaborators in Ramallah.  The men were shot in the legs after the car they were traveling in was ambushed.  The shooters were members of al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades.
Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (CPN-M) rebels threw petrol bombs at the home of an army officer.
The President of an opposition political party was apparently assassinated during the parliamentary elections in the country.  Government officials blamed the Movement for Democracy and Justice (MDJT) guerrilla group for the attack, but no clear evidence was presented that supports this accusation.
Police recovered the body of an alleged informer from Wasoora area of Pulwama district; he had been abducted two days earlier from Maldar-Shopian.
Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (CPN-M) rebels blew up a Nepal Telecommunications Corporation telephone exchange.  The building's guards were forced out before the building was destroyed.Note:  A Nepal Telecommunications Corporation substation in Kailali was destroyed by the CPN-M on 21 April 2002.
Palestinians shot at two Israeli vehicles near the Beit Hagai Junction near Hebron.  No one was hurt.
Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (CPN-M) rebels attacked a microbus near Jorpati.
Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (CPN-M) rebels bombed an office of the Agriculture Development Bank.
The Free Aceh Movement (GAM) is suspected of abducting two subcontractors for Exxon/Mobil and their driver in Aceh.
The driver was killed and another forty-two injured when a remote-detonated bomb went off in a bus in Grath Mode, Doda district.  Nine of the injured were policemen.
An influential figure in the Daman district of Qandahar province was killed at an unidentified location in southern Afghanistan by unknown men.  The victim, Qari Obaydollah, was a strong backer of the former king.
A bomb on the outskirts of Ambon injured two people.  The blast comes as the South Maluku Republic (RMS) separatist group and militant Muslims faced off in the city on the 52nd anniversary of the RMS movement.
Four settlers were killed and another seven wounded when Palestinians opened fire on residents of Adora west of Hebron.  Israeli sources state that the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) claimed the attack but a Hamas-affiliated website carried a statement issued by the group's militant wing -- the Izz-ad-Din al-Qassem Brigades -- claiming the attack.
A dozen masked men armed with M-16s, grenades, and knives attacked two Christian villages just outside Ambon.  Laskar Jihad (LJ) is believed to have been behind the attacks.  Laskar Jihad's (LJ) leader, Jaafar Umar Thalib, arrived in Ambon just before the anniversary on 25 April 2002 of the Christian separatist South Maluku Republic (RMS).
A cash dispenser at the branch of the Caixa Galicia was damaged as a result of a fire started by unknown individuals.
Four individuals attacked the Telepizza Company in the Gros district of San Sebastian, causing minor damage.  This follows a similar attack on a Telepizza Company in San Sebastian a day before.
A bomb was discovered under the steps of the Jalalabad courthouse and safely disposed of.
Unidentified gunmen killed a man at Hanura near Panzla in the Rafiabad area of Varmul district.
Militants shot and killed one person at Dangiwacha village in Baramulla district in northern Kashmir.
Authorities found and defused a motorcycle packed with 80 kilos of dynamite in San Vicente del Caguan.  No further information is provided.
A bomb blew up in the garden of the British Council in Gaza, damaging its door but injuring no one.
Several Molotov cocktails thrown at the Telepizza Company caused minor damages.
Ten members of Porattam, an activist group linked to the Maoist Communist Center (MCC), attacked the Asian Development Bank in Kerala.  The activists entered posing as visitors, then threatened the staff saying they carried bombs.  They destroyed files and computers for half an hour before police arrived.  Porattam demands that the Asian Development Bank leave India.
Upon halting an intercity bus near Tunja, authorities found that it contained a bomb packed with twenty lbs of ANFO explosive and shrapnel.  In addition, maps highlighting Guateque's public buildings and two banks were found, leading authorities to conclude that Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) guerrillas had been targeting Guateque (Boyaca Department).
A pipe bomb found in the front garden of a home in Banbridge (Co Down) was defused by Army disposal experts.
Mayor Jorge Ivan Cardona was kidnapped from his office in Argelia (Antioquia Department).  Authorities attribute the attack to the 47th Front of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC).
Flammable liquid was thrown at the office of Banco Guipuzcoano.  The ensuing fire caused damage to the door of the entrance hall.
Three people were shot to death by the Chola Nallah near the Line of Control in Poonch district.
Several villas in Corsica were attacked within the Sunday to Monday period.  No further information is provided.
A villa in Haute-Corse department was destroyed by an explosive attack.  No one has claimed responsibility for the attack.
Unidentified men shot a woman to death at Bandipura after forcing their way into her father's house.
Dutch politician, Pim Fortuyn, was shot six times upon entering his limousine after finishing an interview at a radio station in Hilversum, east of Amsterdam.  Fortuyn was openly gay and a prime ministerial candidate who was campaigning on a ticket to reform public services and to end immigration.   Economist reports that Fortuyn wanted to halt immigration from Muslim countries out of a fear that Muslims would erode the country's tolerance of homosexuals.  Authorities later arrested and released an activist who they believed had a connection to his murder.  Note:  In November 2002, Volkert van der Graaf, an animal righs activist, admitted to murdering Fortuyn.  He stated that he perpetrated the attack to protect Muslim immigrants and other vulnerable members of society. He was tried in March 2003 and charged with premeditated murder, threatening Fortuyn's driver with a weapon and possession of weapons and ammunition. Van der Graaf was sentenced to eighteen years in jail for these charges.
People's Militias members set fire to a gas pipeline located in the Aguazul Creek water treatment plant in Risaralda Department.
Maoist Communist Center (MCC) activists blew up rail tracks in two locations in Lathear District, Jharkand.  The attacks came on the second day of an economic blockade of Jharkand called by the MCC and People's War Group (PWG).
Thirteen people (eleven French nationals, their Pakistani bus driver and a Pakistani bystander) were killed and another twenty-five wounded (including twelve more French) when a car bomb detonated outside Karachi's Sheraton Hotel, killing the driver of the car as well.  Suicide bombings are extremely rare in Pakistan, and no group claimed the attack which is believed to be a response to President General Musharraf's alliance with the United States specifically and the West generally. As usual, Pakistani officials suggested Indian involvement while India rejected such suggestions.  The French were in Karachi working on Pakistani submarines on behalf of a French state-owned maritime construction company.  Their daily travel times never varied -- and the bomber struck a few minutes before 8 a.m., at which time their bus departed every day for work.
An ambulance was shot at when its driver tried to dodge a Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) roadblock set up on a Florencia road (Caqueta Department).  The driver was injured, and the vehicle was damaged.
The premises of a refrigeration firm, Corse-Froid, was damaged in an attack.  No further information is provided.
The premises of Haute-Corse Road Co. in Haute-Corse Department were seriously damaged by an explosive attack.  The Haute-Corse Road Co. is a state body under the authority of the Haute-Corse General Council.  No one has claimed responsibility for the attack.Note:  This is the second attack in Biguglia in two days.  On 10 May 2002, the refrigeration firm Corse-Froid was damaged in an attack.
Authorities blame the United Self Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) for murdering Eliseo Acevedo, a community activist and former mayoral candidate of San Pablo.
A cooking gas canister was set abalze inside a central subway station in Milan.  A few yards away from the canister, a pro-Islam banner was found.  Slogans praising the cause of Allah were written in Italian and Arabic.
Three bombs were thrown at a Coca-Cola bottling plant in Bihar.  Two exploded, and the third was defused.  Pamphlets left at the site condemned foreign goods.  Police say that the bombing may be related to an extortion scheme.  The report attributes the attack to miscreants, but it should be noted that People's War Group (PWG) and the Maoist Communist Center (MCC) are active in Bihar.
Two bombs placed in a trash can near the Ritz Carlton Istanbul Hotel and in the green area near the Ceylan Intercontinental Hotel in Dolmabahce neighborhood of Istanbul exploded.No further information is provided.
Militants killed a National Conference activist at his home in Magam in Kupwara district.
Puerto Berrio's Municipal Councillor (Antioquia Department), Henry Alberto Salazar, was found dead near El Libano (Tolima Department).  Authorities believe that members of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) and the People's Revolutionary Army abducted him at a roadblock in Tolima Department.  Rebels reportedly wanted $5000 for his return.
Police recovered the body of a former militant from Pinjoza, Shopian.  He had been abducted.
Two people were injured when eight rockets were fired at the District Coordinating Office of Kohlu district in Baluchistan province.
Flammable liquid was poured over a car parked outside a Renault dealership in Guipozcoa province, setting it and three neighboring cars on fire.
Police recovered the body of a man from Karim Abad, Pulwama.
A delegate to the Loya Jirga (grand assembly) from Chakhcharan district in western Afghanistan was killed by unidentified men in his home.
Jihad Jibril, the son of the Popular Front from the Liberation of Palestine -- General Command (PFLP-GC) founder and leader Ahmed Jibril, was killed by a bomb planted under the driver's seat of his car in Beirut.  This attack could have been carried out by rival Palestinian factions or by Israel.
All-Party Hurriyat Conference leader Abdul Ghani Lone was shot to death by unidentified men wearing state police uniforms at a large public meeting in the Idgah area of Srinagar.
The body of a man kidnapped two nights before was found in Akhli Narkot.
A hand grenade was thrown at the house of an Albanian in S. Serbia in Lucane.  There are possibly ethnic motives in this incident (Albanians are a majority in S. Serbia).
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a forester outside his home.  His cousin is a police official, which may have been a factor in the attack.
Palestinians fired a mortar shell from the Gaza Strip across the Green Line.  No one was hurt.
At an illegal roadblock in Camperucho (Cesar Department), National Liberation Army (ELN) rebels kidnapped Pedro Antonio Gutierrez Pineres, an employee with the Bosconia mayor's office.
There were a series of attacks on electricity pylons belonging to the Medellin Public Enterprises, EPM.  The first attack was on Paramo Hill in Guatape Municipality on the Guatape-Envigado line.  The second attack was on the military base at the La Cuana substation.  The third attack was on a pylon located in front of the Carvajal Company in Itagui Municipality.  A fourth attack occurred in Bello.  The last reported attack was on a structure in the Cocoroyo district of Copacabana.  No further information is provided.
The Army has detained suspected Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) rebels who attempted to explode pylons located near Pereira.
Electricity was cut off to seven municipalities after an energy pylon located in the vicinity of Cuatro Esquinas (Saravena, Arauca Department) exploded.
A Russian federal inspector (Alexander Kolomiytsev) was fired upon leaving a restaurant with a figure well-known within the criminal community.  The report suggests inspectors are examining a number of theories including one linked with the redistribution of property in the region.
The 19th Front of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) dynamited two trucks, burned a bus, and damaged the bridge over Tocurnica River on the Eastern Highway in Cienaga (Magdalena Department).
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) rebels attacked the Coastal Electricity Enterprise, Electrocosta, substation in Carmen de Bolivar, causing power outages to the towns of Guamo, Plato, Zambrano, San Juan Nepomuceno, San Jacinto, and Carmen de Bolivar.
The Register's office in San Luis (Antioquia Department) was attacked by a bomb.  Maria Magdalena Hoyos, an employee of the mayor's office, was injured and later died of her injuries.
Authorities defused a car bomb parked in Tibu (Norte de Santander Department).  Authorities blame Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) rebels for planting the bomb.
A bomb was found and defused in front of a cultural center in the northern Iraqi city of Al-Sulaymaniyah which is under Kurdish control.
The 21st Front of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) burned eight vehicles in Coello.  No further information is provided.
A suicide bomber blew himself up at the entrance to Bravissimo caf in Petah Tikva north of Tel Aviv, killing two others and injuring about twenty more.  The al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades claimed the attack, citing retaliation for the Israeli assassination of one of their leaders the week before.  There are confirmed reports that the bomber was the victim's cousin.
The Army thwarted a  attempt made by Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) rebels to blow up the power pylon 101 with dynamite in El 70 and La Vuelta del Cura locations (Magdalena Department).
An explosive device was thrown against a store in Saravena (Arauca Department).  No further information is provided.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed two Muslim sisters in Sharat village near Shopian.  One of the two sisters was a government employee.  They were attacked in their home.
A car bomb exploded at the Provisions Corporation's Corabastos gate.  It is reported that the car's driver was hired by youths to carry some stuff and was unaware that explosives were being loaded in the car.  The explosion injured two in the car and three outside the car.  Perpetrators are unknown.
New People's Army (NPA) rebels shot and killed the former mayor of Goa, Camarines Sur.  His driver was also killed, and his bodyguard was wounded.
El Tiempo reports that a group of peasants from the La Perla district in Anserma (Caldas Department) thwarted guerrilla attempts to dynamite a pylon.
A truck bomb parked in El Castillo (Meta Department) was defused.  Authorities believe that rebels had been targeting the town's main square.
A car bomb placed behind an Arauca government building exploded, leaving two security guards wounded and causing damages to the building and other offices.  Authorities attribute the attack to the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC).
Humberto Parada, San Vicente Chucuri's Councilor, was killed by suspected United Self Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) rebels.
Four Indonesian sailors were abducted in Southern Philippines by members of the Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG) while piloting a coal barge. Two of the hostages escaped. One of them died in captivity. The final one was found by government troops on Jolo Island.
Three mortar shells were fired at a settlement in the Qatif Bloc.  No one was hurt.
In southern Lebanon's Ain al-Hilweh refugee camp, unknown men threw a grenade at the house of an al-Fatah official, Colonel Munir al-Maqdah of the group's military wing.  Al-Maqdah accused Israel of being behind the attack, but it may have been a case of factional fighting within the Palestinian community.  No one was hurt, but the house was damaged.
A resonant bomb placed by a tree in At Horse Square (Sultanahmet neighborhood of Istanbul) exploded.  No further information is provided.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a man from Goshbugh, Sumbal.
A car packed with explosives was blown up by its driver next to an Egged bus at the Megiddo junction in northern Israel.  The blast killed seventeen passengers (thirteen of whom were Israel Defense Force (IDF) soldiers), injured ten more, and killed the car's driver as well.  Palestinian Islamic Jihad's (PIJ) al-Quds Squads claimed the attack.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a former militant at Botingo.  The man had been a suspected informer.
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) rebels detonated an explosive device on a train carrying coal, causing 19 freight cars to overturn (Magdalena Department).
A man was killed as he was transporting a bomb towards the Coca-Cola facility in southern Bogota.
The Navarrese Employment Service in Alsasua, Navarre was damaged by a group of six masked individuals.  The entrance was damaged with graffiti marks like Murderous bosses and Prekarietatea stop, and plastic canisters of animal blood were dumped there.  The group had left fliers supporting a union strike called by the Basque Workers' Solidarity (ELA-STV) and the Union of Patriotic Workers (LAB).
Unidentified gunmen stopped a bus carrying a marriage party near Gambir Mughalan bus stand in Rajouri district and kidnapped the bride, her brother, the groom and his father.  They were taken to nearby Galla village where the gunmen slit the bride's throat and released the others.
An Israeli was slightly wounded when shots were fired on the truck he was driving in the Gaza Strip's Neve Deqalim industrial zone.
Unidentified gunmen shot and injured two men from Chakoora, Pulwama.
A limpet bomb was removed from the car of a suspected Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) member arrested earlier this morning in Algemesi.  The target of the attack is unknown.
Three Israelis were wounded in a bombing attack on a Yeshiva school bus near Kiryat Arba.
Two bombs were detonated on public transportation system facilities in southern Bogota.  The first bomb was thrown at the 54th Sur St. station and the second bomb was thrown against the public transportation system base.  No further information is provided.
A homemade device, made up of six gas canisters, caused heavy damage to the Eurobank branch at 158 Ethnikis Antistaseos St.  No further information is provided.
Unidentified assailants threw a hand grenade at an ethnic Albanian home in southern Serbia.  Southern Serbia is a site of many tensions between Serbs and Albanians.
Cesar Vargas, Representative to the Municipal Council of La Jagua de Ibirico (Cesar Department), was killed. His baby son was reportedly injured.  No further information is provided.
National Liberation Army (ELN) rebels from the Claudia Isabel Escolar Jerez Front abducted Prosecutor Jose Victor Beleno Barrera and Jairo Alonso Mantilla Vergel from the Bucaramanga El Payon Road.  Both were released to the International Red Cross Committee on 20 June because of health conditions.
Two grenades were fired at a Srinagar school during its inauguration at which Jammu and Kashmir Chief Minister Dr. Farroq Abdullah was officiating.  He escaped unharmed.  No others were wounded.  A group calling itself al-Madina claimed the attack.
Molotov cocktails were thrown at the National Institute of Employment (INEM) in San Sebastian.  No damage was reported.
Cesar Blanco Moreno, Secretary General of the Bucaramanga section of the Workers Trade Union (USO), was shot and killed by suspected United Self Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) members.  Moreno was a candidate for the USO National Directorate in upcoming union elections.
Unidentified gunmen shot  a man and his wife to death at Branwar Chadoora.
The body of a man kidnapped several days ago was fished out of the Jhelum River.
The Carmen de Viboral mayor (Antioquia Department) was kidnapped and later released (25 June 2002) by Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) guerrillas.
A group of individuals set fire to a booster station belonging to the Amena mobile phone company in the Alto de Errondo area of San Sebastian.  The operations room suffered major damage.
Authorities blame the 19th Front of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) for dynamiting a section of the gas pipeline close to Cienaga (Magdalena Department).  The gas supply to homes in 20 municipalities was suspended.
A home made explosive device placed against a Retevision booster station in the town of Montcada I Reixach (Barcelona province) caused damage to a satellite dish, an optic fibre box, and the metal fence around the installation.
Five Israelis were killed and four more wounded when an armed Palestinian entered the West Bank settlement of Itamar and attacked residents, some of which were militant settlers.  The attacker was killed by an undercover Border Police unit.  The Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP) claimed the attack.
A British man was killed when his four-wheel-drive vehicle exploded on a road close to the Riyadh residential compound where he lived.  Simon Venesse, 35, had been living in the Saudi capital with his South African wife and their young son for four years, working as a market risk controller at the al-Bank al-Saudi al-Fransi.  The blast occurred while Venesse was driving near the al-Nakheel Westerners residential complex- on the of city's nicest.  Saudi officials blame this bombing, as with the previous, on an alcohol-related turf war among the kingdom's expatriates.  Others cite an indigenous problem with Islamist militants.
A bomb set to a timer was found and safely defused in a residential area of Kupwara district.
A bomb planted in front of Surp Krikor Lusavoric Armenian Church went off in the Beyoglu neighborhood in Istanbul.
New People's Army (NPA) rebels burned a Telecom tower in Cayagan province belonging to a company called Globe.  The attack was apparently in retaliation for failure to pay revolutionary taxes.
A vehicle was set on fire by 200 nationalists.  Three police officers were injured when they came under attack from the same group.  Republicans and Loyalists have blamed each other for starting recent troubles.
Eight employees of an oil and gas company were killed in an ambush by militants of the Dima Halam Daoga (DHD) tribal group in Assam.  The group has been fighting for political autonomy for six years.A police spokesman said heavily armed militants of the Dima Halam Daoga (DHD) and the National Democratic Front of Bodoland (NDFB) attacked a five-vehicle convoy of Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) officials in Dolodoli, a village in eastern Assam's Karbi Anglong district, 350 kilometers from Guwahati Monday evening. A group of eight to ten NDFB and DHD militants ambushed the convoy from atop a small hillock with automatic weapons killing six on the spot and wounding four more,
Approximately twenty people were injured when a bomb exploded in the Kurdish city of Arbil, near a restaurant and garden.
Nine athletes were abducted from their vehicle by Free Aceh Movement (GAM) rebels.  The men were released by GAM on 6 July, explaining that they were suspected of being spies.
People's War Group (PWG) militants bombed the house of a Communist Party of India (CPI) member in Andhra Pradesh.  According to the report, the CPI member had not been resident in the house for the past decade.
The husband of Sara Mercedes Bolanos, who is the mayor of an unidentified town in Narino Department, was kidnapped by Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) guerrillas.
An Iranian Baloch leader, Noor Mohammed, was shot to death by six men who broke into his house in Quetta.
Free Aceh Movement (GAM) rebels abducted nine crew men from a boat that had been chartered by Exxon Mobil.  The boat was intercepted by two fishing boats off North Aceh.  The men were released by GAM on 6 July, along with nine athletes who had been abducted days earlier.  GAM explained that those kidnapped were suspected of being spies.
A suspicious object was found attached to a Briton's car in Riyadh and safely removed by Saudi police.  Though the British embassy later stated the object was not, in fact, a bomb, media reports of its being defused would seem to contradict this.  There has been a series of car bombings targeting Western expatriates in the kingdom and this latest occurred in the same residential compound as the June 20, 2002 attack that killed Briton Simon Venesse.
Mendiano 70's radio journalist, Efrain Alberto Varela Noriega's, was abducted from his car on his way home from covering the University of Arauca's graduation ceremony.  Authorities believe that United Self Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) members took him out of his car and shot him, leaving his body on the road that leads to Cano Limon.  Noriega had been threatened several times for criticizing politicians and armed groups.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a former militant of Neelu Kulgam.
A bomb exploded on a New Delhi-bound train in Uttar Pradesh, injuring ten people.
An unidentified person threw a Molotov cocktail into Imar Bankasi's Kucukkoy Branch of a bank in the Gaziosmanpass district of Istanbul.  The explosion caused minor damage to the bank branch.  An investigation is under way.
Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (CPN-M) rebels are believed responsible for a bomb attack on the main office of the ruling Nepali Congress Party that injured ten people.
Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (CPN-M) rebels are blamed for the murder of a community leader.  The victim was vice-chairman of a forest users' committee.
An Israeli was wounded in a shooting attack on his car near the village of Anzah in the West Bank.  He was on his way to the settlement of Mevo Dotan and was a resident of Sanur settlement.
A Palestinian shot and wounded a policeman who had stopped him near Herod's Gate.  Other policemen on the scene fired back, engaging the Palestinian.  A second Palestinian was killed in the crossfire -- it is unclear by which side.  The initial shooter managed to escape but was captured several hours later.
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) guerrillas fired at the vehicle that Santa Barbara's mayor Carlos Lopez and three other local government officials were traveling in.  There were no injuries reported.
An explosive device detonated in Srbica at a police station, damaging a few windows and vehicles parked in the vicinity.  No arrests have been made in connection with the attack.
Gunmen injured a man from Utrasoo Pathri Bandey in Kupwara District.
The mayor of Santa Barbara, Carlos Mario Lopez Rodas, was assaulted.  The attack occurred near Alto de Minas where unidentified armed men, appearing to be members of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), stationed themselves on both sides of the street, threw grenades and opened fire on the vehicle in which Lopez Rodas and his advisors were seated.  No one was hurt in the attack.
Unidentified gunmen killed a man from Warpora, Pattan.
An explosive charge blew up as a bus passed by Bet Hagay in the Hebron Hills.  No one was hurt, but the bus was damaged.
Palestinians fired at a border police patrol in Wadi Ara near the Green Line.  No one was hurt.
A village guard died during an armed attack in the Uludere Township.  Assailants opened fire on guards who were carrying out an operation with security forces from Uludere.  One guard was also injured in the attack.
A woman was killed after being abducted by militants in Rajdhani area of Poonch district.
The SU Oficina Stationary Store, a business owned by the family of Cucuta's mayor Manuel Guillermo Mora, was the target of an explosive attack.  Two people on motorcycles were seen leaving a package and then fleeing the scene.  Considerable damage was done, and a few residents were injured.
An explosion took place in Taksim Gezi Park, right next to the ventilation pipe of a McDonalds fast food restaurant.  No damage was caused.
Two mortars were fired at Gush Qatif in the Gaza Strip.  No one was hurt.
The three-year-old daughter of Colon's mayor Nivardo Erazo (Putumayo Department) and her nanny were kidnapped by suspected Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) members.  On 1 August 2002, FARC released Francy Lorena Erazo and her nanny.  The two were being held by FARC guerrillas who were trying to pressure for Erazo's resignation.
Gunmen shot and killed a man in Nihalpora.  No further information is provided.
An explosive device went off in broad daylight at a French riot police barracks that was under construction.  The building was completely destroyed.  This is the second time in one year that this building has been attacked.  No one was injured in the blast.Note:  An unnamed Nationalist group later claimed responsibility for this blast according to an authenticated statement which was sent to France-3 TV and passed on to the AFP.  The claim was made on the eve of the first visit to Corsica of Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy.
A Catholic house was destroyed by a petrol bomb in north Belfast.  Seven other Catholic houses were also attacked by the same crowd of Loyalists.  One person was arrested but later released.  No one was injured.
At least two explosive devices were thrown through the window of a Protestant home in north Belfast.  No one was injured, and the devices caused only minor damage to the home.
Gerard Lawlor, a Catholic man, was shot and killed as he walked home in Belfast.  Witnesses say they heard four or five shots fired.  The Ulster Freedom Fighters (UFF) claimed responsibility for the murder.  On 29 August 2002, The Irish News reported that the suspect in this murder is a senior member of the Loyalist Volunteer Force (LVF), proving that the LVF and UFF have close ties to one another.
A bomb was detonated by remote control on the Binyamina-Ashdod Railway near Rehovot.  The train's driver was injured in the attack.
Militants shot and killed three members of a Village Defense Committee (VDC) in Sumber village near Ramban in Doda district.
A bomb set in a parked fuel tanker exploded.  The perpetrators are unknown, but it is likely that the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF) is behind this attack.
A San Joaquin caf frequented by political officials and journalists was the target of an explosive attack that injured thirteen and killed two people.  The injured include Medellin's Councilman Fabio Estrada Chica, Medellin's mayor official Ramiro Estrada, Todelar News Director Jorge Carvallo, and El Clarin Radio News Director Fernando Vera Angel.  One of the two killed in the attack was identified as Hildebrando Giraldo Para, the former Congressman and former Manager of the Medellin Power Enterprise.
Authorities believe that National Liberation Army (ELN) members killed Councilman Basilio Rojas Quintero at his farm in rural La Culebra.
Two Israelis were wounded when Palestinian gunmen opened fire on their car near Ma'ale Levonah north of Ramallah.
A Qassem 2 rocket was fired into Israel from the Gaza Strip.  No one was hurt.
Two mortar shells blew up near a settlement in central Gaza.  No one was injured.
Malecon 2000, a path that South American presidents who are meeting in Guayaquil will tour was targeted by the Group of Popular Combatants (GPC).  Despite the explosion, South American presidents will proceed with their plans to visit the sector.Note:  AFP reports that GPC left propaganda carrying an anti-globalization message.
Karim Ahmadpur of the Revolutionary Union of Iranian Kurdistan was wounded when fired upon near his house in the Tayrawah district of Arbil.
Militants shot and injured a man in his house at Path-Diyalgam in Anantag district.
An explosive device was found outside the Milan headquarters of carmaker FIAT.  The device consisted of a paint tin, containing three bottles of turpentine, a camping cooker, an alarm clock and what appeared to be a timer.  Police say the bomb was poorly constructed and probably would have failed to explode if not first found.Note:  The Revolutionary Front for Communism sent a note priority mail claiming responsibility for this attack and one at the labor union, CISL building.
Authorities blame the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) for murdering Coloso's Councilman (Sucre Department) Gabriel Eduardo Montes.  No further information is provided.
Two brothers were killed in a Palestinian ambush near the West Bank village of Jama'in.  The al-Fatah-linked al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades claimed the attack.
Two explosions brought down an energy tower that joins the Riohaca and Maiayura substations.  No further information is provided.
The Indigenous People's Federal Army (IPFA) claimed two bomb explosions in a town in North Cotabato.  The town was celebrating the anniversary of its founding.
An explosive device went off in the restroom of the Great Sayyid Sadiq Mosque, slightly injuring two people.
A thirteen-year-old girl died and three other children and a woman were injured as a result of an explosion that took place in a house in Tale village.  The explosion was due to an amount of TNT being placed in the house.
An Israeli was found shot to death in the Geshuri industrial zone on the Green Line near Tulkarm.  His body had been tied up.
Six Filipino Christian preachers were abducted by the Muslim Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG). The two men were beheaded. Two of the women managed to escape in April 2003, when they were found wandering on the Southern part of Jolo Island. The other two remained in captivity on the Island.
A mortar shell was fired at a Qatif Block settlement.  No one was hurt.
Unidentified gunmen kidnapped and killed a man from Mustafabed.  His body was recovered in Malri village.
A grenade exploded early in the morning on a street in the Croatian tourist town of Makarska.  The mayor blamed the event on the mafia.  This is certainly possible but also not necessarily exclusive to terrorism.
Three Basque separatists were arrested for attacking a Spanish restaurant in Dublin.  The damage caused to the restaurant totals more than 1000 euros.  The radicals wrecked the Spanish flag, neon light and soccer flag hanging in the restaurant and injured two cooks and the son of the restaurant's owner.
A second car bomb was found by the National Police near Santa Pola marina.  The discovery of this vehicle containing explosives comes hours after a car bomb exploded and killed two people near a Civil Guard post in Santa Pola.
Three people were injured near the West Bank settlement of Avney Hafetz when a gunmen opened fire on their car.
A bomb detonated in a mass transit station in Medellin.  No further information is provided.
Suspected members of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) attacked a Saravena Airport runway with explosive-packed cooking gas canisters launched from mortars mounted on a truck.  Ninety percent of the airport facilities were damaged, and ten civilians and six soldiers were wounded.
British Army experts defused a pipe bomb that was found in an alleyway beside the so-called peace line in North Belfast.  Authorities believe that the bomb was thrown from loyalist Glenbryn.
Guatica's Councilor, Gladis del Socorro Valez and four officials from the Agrarian and Cattle Development Institute (IFA) were abducted and later released (on 16 August 2002) by Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) guerrillas.
An alleged member of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) claimed responsibility for detonating an explosive device in the Governor's Office (Atlantico Department).  The attack caused extensive damage and injured three people.
A bomb went off outside Major Jamil Zaydan's house in the Ain al-Hilweh refugee camp, destroying his car.  He is an al-Fatah member and an aide to the al-Fatah Secretary of the Sidon region.  No one was hurt in the blast.
Two people were killed by gunmen at a house in Luthang village.  No further information is provided.
This is the second set of explosions that occurred on President Alvaro Uribe Valez's inauguration day:  At 3:30pm, as President Uribe began his inaugural address, two explosions from homemade mortars occurred four blocks from the presidential palace in a poor neighborhood.  Twenty-one people died and seventy others were wounded by the blast.  Thirteen of ninety-six mortar tubes were fired.
The All Nepal National Independent Students' Union, the student wing of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (CPN-M), claimed a bomb attack on the College of Applied Business.
Brigadier Bartar Hussain Naqvi, the director-general of the National Database and Registration Authority, was wounded when unidentified gunmen opened fire on his official car in Quetta.
A bomb detonated on a road near Pasto (Narino Department) where President Alvaro Uribe was attending a forum on regional community needs.  Four soldiers who were part of the security detail for the presidential visit were wounded.
Unknown individuals attempted to burn the house of Roberto Ibarretxe, a councilor for Eusko Alkartasuna (Basque Nationalist Party).  The fire damaged the lower section of the building and damaged a tractor.  This attack comes one month after pamphlets signed by the Basque Nationalist Party and the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) threatened the area.
Palestinians opened fire on a group of surveyors who were working at the entrance to Dugit settlement in the northern Gaza Strip.  The Israel Defense Force (IDF) engaged the shooters, but they escaped.  One of the surveyors was wounded in the exchange.  Hamas' al-Qassam Brigades announced that one of their men was killed by the exchange of gunfire as well.
A device, containing gasoline, was thrown onto the roof of the Northeast Research Station in the Allegheny National Forest in Irvine, Pennsylvania.  The ensuing fire caused nearly $700,000 in damages.  The Earth Liberation Front (ELF) claimed the attack, stating that all other US Forest Services administration and research facilities, as well as all Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources (DCNR) buildings nationwide should now be considered likely targets.
An explosive device was found and made safe in the beach town of Santa Pola.  The 5-kilo explosive charge was found buried in the sand at the town's main beach next to the Elcano Discotheque.  Experts say the bomb was not operative and wouldn't have caused any harm.Note:  Another explosive device was found and defused at the Elcano Discotheque on 9 August 2002.
The former governor of Colombia's Arauca Department, his wife and his chauffer were abducted while traveling through Venezuela toward the Colombian city of Cucuta.  The perpetrators have not been identified, but sources believe that Colombian rebels who crossed the border may be responsible.
Cesar Hernan Ordonez, the Ombudsman's delegate responsible for displaced people in Narino Department, was shot and killed.  The perpetrators have not yet been identified.
Authorities report that three bombs were defused in Saravena (Arauca Department).  One of the bombs had been left near a school.
A bomb exploded outside the Communications Ministry in Kabul but caused no injuries.  The building was damaged in the blast.
A bomb planted beneath a fallen tree injured two people.  No further information is provided.
A mortar shell was fired at a settlement in the northern part of the Gaza Strip.  No one was hurt, and no damage was caused.
A mortar shell was fired at a settlement in the northern Gaza Strip.  No one was hurt.
Iraqi dissidents penetrated the Iraqi Embassy in Berlin and held employees hostage for over seven hours.  A group calling itself Democratic Iraqi Opposition of Germany claimed that the attack was to press for the overthrow of Saddam Hussein.  The German police ended the conflict, freeing ten hostages -- two of which were slightly hurt -- and arresting five people involved.  One of the hostages was the head of the Iraqi mission in Berlin, the First Secretary to Germany.  The assailants are said to be Sunni Muslims that formed this group to be ...included in the recent talks between opposition groups and the US over the future status of Iraq.Note:  On 23 August, police arrested Abu Qasi A, the suspected mastermind behind the attack.  Qasi A has been living in Germany for twenty-five years.Note: The five Iraqi dissidents who were arrested were brought to trial in March 2003.  Their lawyer argued on 25 March that the group had the same goals as the US-led war on Iraq, to depose Saddam Hussein.  The men are charged with hostage-taking, causing bodily harm and trespassing; they face up to fifteen years in prison if convicted.
Unidentified gunmen fired at a truck near Zawoora, Shopian, killing the driver and injuring a second man.
A total of twelve people, mainly adolescents, were kidnapped from a vacation center in Chigorodo (Antioquia Department).  Of the twelve abducted, two adults have been released.
Unidentified men shot and killed a Wana village man in the Mochi Karham area of the Mahsood tribe in Pakistan's Federally Administered Tribal Area (FATA).  His corpse was discovered several days later (20 or 21 August).  He had been suspected of spying for US forces in the region.  US dollars were found on his body.
Unidentified gunmen kidnapped a Humpathri Noorabad man on 21 August and killed him.  His body was found the next day in Nandmarg, Noorabad.
An explosive device started a fire and damaged the kitchen of a flat in Ravenswood Park in Belfast.  One person was treated for smoke inhalation.
The wife and daughter of Jose Angel Cana, former municipal Government Secretary of San Miguel (Putumayo Department) were kidnapped in Mocoa, the capital of Putumayo.  The perpetrators have not been identified yet.  No further information is provided.
Unidentified gunmen shot and injured a Warapora woman near Bandipore.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a woman in Jai Dhar, Bhaderwah of Doda District.  Her brother was injured in the attack.
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) guerrillas opened fire on a group of people at a caf in Paz de Ariporo (Casanare Department).  Two children were killed instantly, and two adults were wounded.
Gunmen fired at the car carrying Sayd Homayun Bamiani, head of the Islamic Youth of Afghanistan (a political party), in Kabul.  The attackers were in a black Toyota Corolla with tinted windows.  No one was hurt in the attempted attack.
Pipe bombs were found in the Ballysillan area of Belfast and made safe by Army experts.
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) guerrillas attacked the telecommunications center located between Mocoa and Sibundoy in Putumayo Department.  Although no damage was caused to the antennas or communications equipment of Telecom and Inravision, two police officers were killed and eight others were injured in the attack.
A ten-year-old Catholic girl is being treated for shock after a petrol bomb was thrown against the back window of her house in north Belfast.  The residents of the house were able to extinguish the fire, limiting the damage to the property.
A soldier died from injuries sustained when the bomb he was attempting to defuse exploded.  The bomb was discovered in Lalitpur District.  Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (CPN-M) rebels are presumed responsible.
Guillermo Perez Medina, a radio announcer from San Pedro Municipality (Sucre Department) was assassinated in Barranquilla (Atlantico Department).  No further information is provided.
Militants shot and killed three members of a family of shepherds in Milwani in Udhampur District.  They had migrated to higher pasture to graze their animals, making them an easy target.
Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (CPN-M) rebels set fire to the home of DB Lama, the minister of state for general administration.  The minister's family was forced from the home before Maoists destroyed it with a bomb.
Three banks were firebombed in the Pamplona area of Spain.  Two Caja Rural de Navarra branches and a Caja Navarra branch were the targets of the attacks.  Some damage was reported but no injuries.
Marked gunmen from the Fatah-linked Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade shot and killed a man accused of collaborating with Israel -- the third such killing in a week.  The Brigades claimed the killing which took place in Jenin.  The man, Rassim Abu Ohn, was 24 years old.
Three explosives detonated almost simultaneously in areas of Barranquilla and Soledad.  Authorities believe that terrorists are responsible, but a particular group has not been blamed.
The bullet-ridden body of a son of Maulana Haq Nawaz Jhangvi (leader of a banned sectarian group) was found in a graveyard in Usman Colony -- a shantytown in North Nazimabad near Karachi.  The man had been a Sipah-e-Sahaba (SSP) activist.
Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (CPN-M) gunmen opened fire on the residence of Radhyeshyam Joncche, the Nepal Congress Bhaktapur District Committee President.  Joncche was wounded and one of the gunmen killed in the attack.
Authorities defused a bomb that they were alerted to by residents of the Jipijapa sector of Quito.  The bomb consisted of a PVC pipe filled with black gunpowder.  This finding follows several bomb attacks and threats reported in Quito and Guayaquil last week.
A bomb exploded in a garbage container near the Directorate of Security in Istanbul.  The blast caused minor damage.
The premises of the National Front Party (NF) -- of which controversial French politician Jean-Marie Le Pen is President -- in Pau was destroyed by fire.  The office of the Regional Councilor and Department Secretary of the NF (located next door) was also destroyed in the fire.  According to NF members, the fire is a result of the terrorist violence stirred up by totalitarian democracy.  No one has claimed responsibility.
A settler from Neve Tzuf was injured in a shooting attack his car on Bi'r Zayt bridge near Ramallah.
Militants kidnapped a man from his home in Gatroo village in Tral and later shot him to death.
Militants kidnapped a National Conference worker from Achkanpora village of Handwara in the frontier district of Kupwara.
Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (CPN-M) rebels are suspected in a blast at government offices.
A car bomb in Kabul killed thirty people and wounded approximately 170 others in a busy market area of the capital filled with people shopping before Friday -- the main Muslim prayer day.  Further increasing the casualty toll was a smaller bomb detonated near shops selling television and satellite dishes (forbidden under the Taliban) which drew people to the scene.  The large car bomb, apparently a taxi, went off moments later.  Afghan officials blamed this attack as well as the assassination attempt on President Hamid Karzai several hours later in Qandahar on remnants of the Taliban or Al-Qaeda.  Former Islamic militia leader Hekmatyar is another suspect, having recently declared jihad against the American forces and the US-backed Afghan government.
Rebels from the 19th Front of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) are blamed for an explosion on a gas pipeline located between Cienaga and Santa Marta municipalities.
The Earth Liberation Front (ELF) is presumed responsible for damaging construction vehicles and a sample home in an upscale neighborhood in Goochland County, Virginia.  The attackers left behind a burned U.S. flag and a message indicating an environmental agenda.  The damage caused was significant.Note:  Incident date is approximate.
Rogue Morelli Zarate, the Dean of Education at the University of Magdalena, was shot to death by unidentified gunmen.  No further information is provided.
Unknown persons threw two grenades into the car of Inisir Ashirkulor, Security Council Secretary for the acting-head of the Kyrgyz president's administration.  Ashirkulov was slightly injured by grenade splinters.
An explosion along the Santa Marta gas pipeline on the road between Magdalena and Cienaga municipality, halted gas supply to forty percent of the Atlantic Coast.  Authorities have not determined who is responsible for the attack.
Twelve people were wounded when a bomb went off outside a video store in Khost's main Madina Market.  Such stores have been banned under the Taliban and have become a popular terrorist target since the regime fell.  Authorities blame remnants of the Taliban or Al-Qaeda for the attack.
A crude pipe bomb wrapped in bolts exploded at a Protestant home in Larne.  The three people home at the time of the blast escaped unharmed.
A remote-controlled device, made of an artillery shell, was found under a bridge that crossed the Fortanga River.  Army sappers were able to safely defuse the bomb.
An explosive device detonated outside the office of the Central Bank in Istanbul, damaging a van belonging to the bank.  No further information is provided.
An explosion destroyed a hotel in Addis Ababa on the Ethiopian New Year.  The Oromo Liberation Front (OLF) was blamed, but the incident does not fit their modus operandi, and they denied involvement.
Militants attacked the house of Jammu and Kashmir Minister of State for Tourism Sakina Itoo.  No one was hurt by the grenade thrown at her Dhamhal Hanjupora house in the southern Kashmir town of Anantnag.
Two mortar shells were fired at a settlement in the central Gaza Strip.  No one was hurt, and no damage was caused.
An electricity pylon, located in Giraldo municipality, was damaged by Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) rebels, causing an electricity cut-off to Uramita, Giraldo, Canasgordas, Frontino, Buritica, Dabeiba and Abriaqui as well as the munipalities of Apartado, Arboletes, Carepa, Chigorodo, Mutata, Necocli, Danjuan de Uraba, San Pedro de Uraba and Turbo in Uraba.
Palestinian gunmen injured an Israeli woman near Avney Hafetz in the West Bank in a shooting attack from a passing car.
Three days before Macedonian parliamentary elections, an ethnic Albanian policeman was shot and killed at a security post in Bogovinje, near Tetovo.  Radio reports indicated that the attackers may have been from a group that kidnapped five civilians in the same area last month.
A 40-kg explosive charge was found near Morag settlement in Gaza.  Sappers safely detonated the bomb.
The Ulster Defense Association (UDA) is being blamed for a drive-by shooting attack in Belfast that seriously injured three people.  Authorities are calling the attack sectarian violence and fear a return to the days of the ...1970's when sectarian murder was commonplace.
Ethnic Albaninan militants, reportedly from the Albanian National Army (ANA), an ethnic paramilitary group, opened fire on a car that was part of a convoy accompanying outgoing interior minister Ljube Boskoski.  The minister was not in the vehicle at the time and no one was injured.  A police spokesman said that police had already foiled one plot to assassinate the minister earlier in the day.  Police did not announce the attempted assassination until three days after the incident, so as to avoid complicating the national elections that were held the next day.
Militants set off an explosion as the motorcade of Jammu and Kashmir Tourism Minister Sakeena Itoo passed by near Dhamhal Hanjipora in Anantnag district.  They then opened fire on the convoy, killing a policeman and a civilian and wounding two other policemen.  This was the second assassination attempt against Itoo in five days.  She is both the only woman in the outgoing government and the youngest candidate in the third phase of the four-part polls.  Indian authorities say Lashkar-e-Jabbar (LeJ) claimed the attack.  Last year this group threatened women with attacks if they did not adhere to strict Islamic dress codes.
Shots were fired on a Border Police force in Tulkarm.  No one was hurt.
Jim Grey, a leading Ulster Defense Association member was attacked by a gunman as he and a friend stood in a parking lot.  Grey was injured as a result of the attack.  Authorities believe that the attack may be related to the murder of Stephen Warnock on 13 September.  Warnock was a member of the Loyalist Volunteer Force (LVF).  Note:  In a later report, the BBC links the LVF with this attempted assassination.
Two under-car booby trap bombs were discovered by police when they stopped a car in Newry on the Irish Republic border.  Two men, described as dissident republicans, were arrested.  The bombs were made safe by experts.Note:  On 19 September, The Guardian reported that the two arrested individuals were linked to the Real Irish Republican Army (RIRA).
Police recovered the body of a Shangus Achabal man from Mattan.
Shots were fired from the Tulkarm area toward workers on the Trans-Israel highway in the Nizzane Oz area, but no one was hurt.
The Popular Liberation Army (EPL) attempted an attack on a government building in Bucaramanga (Santander Department) but was thwarted by authorities who intercepted the stolen Jeep that the rebels were driving and safely detonated the 40 kg of R-1 explosive found inside.
Two BJP candidates, contesting elections in Pulwama district were fired on by militants in Litar.  The candidates' guards returned fire, and the BJP men escaped unharmed.
The body of a man was recovered from a stream in the Darhal area of Rajouri district.
The body of a young Palestinian man was found north of Nablus.  Palestinian sources said he had been shot by Palestinians who suspected him of collaborating with Israel.
A Chechen man detonated a hand grenade near a police roadblock.  He was killed and the blast injured a Georgian police officer.
A suicide bomber blew himself up as soon as he got onto the cross town number 4 bus on Allenby Street in downtown Tel Aviv.  Five additional people were killed immediately, including the bus driver and another forty-nine were wounded.  One of them later died, bringing the death toll to seven.  The casualties would have been worse had the door of the bus been closed.  Hamas claimed the attack, the second suicide bombing in two days following a long calm since 4 August 2002.
Militants tried to assassinate Jammu and Kashmir Tourism Minister Sakina Itoo for the third time this month.  They lobbed a grenade at her house, but it failed to explode.  Itoo -- Kashmir's only female minister -- was not at home at the time.
Unidentified militants fired shots at a car full of people canvassing for an independent candidate in the elections.  The driver of the vehicle was wounded.  The attack took place in Watihal, Kalgam.
Jammu and Kashmir Tourism Minister Sakina Itoo escaped another assassination attempt (the fourth in the past couple weeks) when militants triggered an explosion against her motorcade near Shemhal Bernjupora in Anantnag district's town of Mirhama.  Her guard was killed in the attack as was a bystander.  Four others were injured.  Hizbul Mujahedin (HM) claimed the attack.
Two young members of the Earth Liberation Front (ELF) attempted to set fire to a construction crane at the Short Pump Town Center Mall, in Henrico County, Virginia.  The teenagers rolled up an American flag, which had been dipped in kerosene, and shoved it into the crane's fuel tank.  They lit the fuse, but the makeshift device failed to detonate.  The two perpetrators, along with a third teenager, were eventually arrested in connection with this and other attacks in Henrico County.  The boys, Adam Blackwell, Aaron Linas and John Wade, also left a threatening letter in the mailbox of the construction company's office.  The note read, how can you sleep at night, in your house, with your beautiful wife, knowing that none of it was earned by the merit of your character, but by destroying the environment and contributing to urban and suburban decay by establishing revolting SPRAWL such as Short Pump?  Think about it.  ELF.
Militants threw a grenade at the house of a Congress candidate in Kachdooru, Pulwama.
Two grenades were thrown at a jeep belonging to Vlatko Stefanovski, Security Chief for Prime Minister Ljubco Georgievski.  The jeep and 24 other vehicles were damaged in the explosion.
A car bomb, with two suspected Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) members inside, blew up in the Spanish city of Bilbao, killing both individuals.  Authorities believe that the explosive detonated prematurely as the ETA members were going to attack someone else.  This attack comes only days after two leaders of ETA were arrested in France.
There was a shooting incident in Netzarim.  No one was hurt.  No further information was available.
Five gunmen believed to be linked to the Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG) opened fire on US humanitarian aide workers.  A gunman was killed and another wounded in a gun battle with Filipino soldiers.
Loyalists are being blamed for firing six shots into the living room of a private home in east Belfast which injured a 26-year-old man.  A car, believed to have been used in the attack, was later found burned out.
Unidentified militants shot two shepherds to death in Hanil Udhyanpur, Doda.  The men had been on their way to Kathua with their cattle.
A 20-kg explosive device with a drawing representing the island of Corsica was found at the Alpes-Maritimes tax office in Nice.  The bomb was deactivated by experts.Note:  On 27 September, the Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC) claimed responsibility for this attack, stating that the Corsican ...situation is not going in the right direction.
A suspected informer was shot to death in Chanjemula, Handwara.
Unidentified men fired over twenty rockets from Jundran Mountain, at Kohlu, some of them landing near the office of the District Coordinating Offices.  No one was hurt, and no damage was caused.
Two Israelis were wounded in a shooting attack on their car near the settlement of Ateret near Ramallah.
Police in France found a 100-gram explosive charge wrapped in aluminum on board a Royal Air Maroc plane.  The plane had originated in Marrakech, Morocco, but the explosive was discovered at the Metz-Nancy Lorraine Airport in eastern France.  Authorities have determined that the explosive is made from the same material as one found on Richard Reid, the alleged shoe bomber, in December 2001.
Four members of an Israeli family were wounded in a shooting attack on their car at the intersection in between Hebron and Yatta.  The shooters fired from the nearby settlement of Beit Hagai.
A car bomb left in front of a building that houses  the Offices of the Prosecutor General, a radio station and other entities, was defused by authorities in La Ceja municipality (Antioquia Department).
The Earth Liberation Front (ELF) claimed responsibility for causing about $16,000 in damage at two McDonald's fast food restaurants and a Burger King, in western Henrico County, in Virginia.  The perpetrators defaced the windows of the restaurants with a white substance that scratched the glass.  They also scratched the outdoor menu board and drive-through monitor of one of the premises.  The assailants left ELF calling cards at all three locations.  Note:  Incident date is approximate.
A village leader was shot to death in Akhal Bhatpora, Gandubal.
Loyalist paramilitaries are being blamed for placing a petrol bomb inside a car belonging to a Catholic woman.  The device exploded moments before the woman and he three-year-old son were going to get into the car.  The Ulster Defense Association (UDA) is expected to have been involved.
Five minutes after a bomb explosion at Roxy Cinema, a second bomb explosion at the Satkhira stadium, where the Gurpukurer Mela fair was being held, left two dead and thirty-five others injured.  Witnesses claim that the bomb was thrown at the women performers.  Officials suspect that the Islamic Shashantantra Andolon (ISA), a group that has accused circus and hall authorities of displaying indecent shows and porno movies, is involved in the attack.Note:  The explosions occurred as thousands of people, including Muslims, were celebrating Gurpuku Fair, a century-old festival honoring a local Hindu King.
Two petrol bombs were thrown from Alliance Avenue into the garden of Protestant Glenbryn Park in Belfast.  This attack comes 24 hours after a car bomb exploded on Alliance Avenue, narrowly missing a woman and her child.
An unidentified group abducted a football coach from his home and later killed him.  No further information is available.
A petrol bomb was thrown onto the roof of an abandoned bungalow in Strand Walk.  The targets of the attack were elderly Catholics in the Short Strand area.  The attack is being blamed on loyalists.
Israel Defense Forces and Border Police sappers neutralized three explosive devices near the Gaza settlement of Morag.
Militants lobbed grenades inside a polling station in Kawdoora, Kulgam, Anantnag.  Between one and four security and polling personnel were injured.
A civilian was injured in a blast that took place at a garden in Kundlan in the Shopian area of Pulwama.
Militants detonated an explosive device inside a polling station in Litter, Pulwama, which injured between one and three security personnel.
Militants fired from a distance at a polling station in Payinmoh in Kulgam district.  No injuries were reported.
A grenade thrown by militants detonated in Bijbehara in Anantnag and wounded one woman.
Two women were injured when militants attacked a polling station booth in Sagam in Kokernag.
Fabio Gomez, the Mayor of Almaguer, escaped death after receiving a package bomb at his temporary residence and office in Popayan, the Cauca capital.  Gomez resigned from his position following the attack.
Unidentified militants killed three National Conference workers in the town of Haihama in Kupwara district.  Lashkar-e-Jabbar (LeJ) claimed the attack.
One Israeli man was injured when he was fired upon as he worked on the road east of the village of Baqah al-Sharqiyah.
Naxalites of the People's War Group (PWG) blew up the Mandal Revenue Office (MRO) building at Addavedu village in Prakasham district.  Sources say it could have been in protest to the recent arrest of their comrades.
A member of the organization Black Star claimed responsibility for setting fire to a car with US license plates in the Athens suburb of Kavouri.  The attack was carried out in ...resistance against the mass organization of US imperialism and to their local collaborators.  The group also called for freedom to all November 17 (N17) members who have been held in custody.
A mortar shell was fired at a settlement in the southern part of the Gaza Strip.  No one was hurt, and no damage was caused.
Unidentified gunmen abducted and later shot a Sajna Daresh, Ganderbal, man to death.
The Earth Liberation Front (ELF) is responsible for causing about $15,000 in damages to two SUV's at a Henrico subdivision in Virginia.  The SUV's had been slashed with hatchets and notes left behind indicated that it was the work of the ELF.
A Qassem rocket was fired at a settlement in the northern Gaza Strip.  No one was hurt.
About a dozen gunmen broke into a private home in Staraya Zunzha and shot the occupant point blank.  The attack is being blamed on Chechen rebels.
Three mortar shells were fired at a settlement in the Qatif Bloc a few hundred meters from Khan Yunus.  No one was hurt.
An unidentified body was recovered by police from Turikami Nallah in the border district of Kupwara.
The home of Oswaldo Torres, located in Carmen de Bolivar within Bolivar Department's Rehabilitation and Consolidation zone, was destroyed by an explosive device.Note:  Incident date is approximate.
Shots were fired at a settlement southeast of Jenin.  No one was hurt.
Citizens alerted the police to a suspicious package found in a marketplace.  Four civilians and two policemen were injured as authorities defused the explosive device.
Militants detonated an explosive device outside a polling booth in Banihal.  No injuries were reported.
A suicide bomber killed one other person and injured sixteen more when he detonated outside a bus in the greater Tel Aviv area.  The bomber had fallen while trying to board the bus when it stopped across from Bar-Ilan University and was pinned temporarily by the driver and two passengers.  They decided to let him go and flee, at which point he began running and self-detonated.  The militant wing of Hamas, the Al-Qassem Brigades, claimed the attack.
According to Colombian intelligence sources, the United Self Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) killed five persons and seriously injured one in Urena, Venezuela.  All the victims were linked to the National Liberation Army (ELN).  Carlos Giovanni Pallares Pallares, the leader responsible for finances of the Armando Cacua Guerro Front of the ELN, was among the victims.
A car bomb attempt on the National Enterprise for Telecommunications (Telecom) was thwarted by authorities who trailed and arrested two men.
A homemade bomb was found near the US Armed Southern Forces Command Headquarters.  Local authorities believe that the bomb was intended to explode at a time when the fort was filled with revelers and to disrupt the celebration of the feast of Our Lady of Pilar.  The Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG) is suspected in this attack along with a series of bombings in the city.
A firebomb exploded under a car belonging to the mayor of Khalandri, an Athens suburb.  The vehicle was wrecked, but no one was injured.  The attack comes one day before elections for mayor and prefects take place around the country.
A woman was shot and injured by an unidentified man in Behota Marmat.  She died of her injuries two days later.
Two people were killed and another two were injured when a bomb exploded at a scrap shop on Wazirabad-Daska Road in Wazirabad.
The home of Martina McGuigan, a Catholic woman in east Belfast, was targeted in a petrol bomb attack.  The bombs damaged McGuigan's gate and forced her and her family to decide to move from the area.  McGuigan's house has been the target of petrol bomb attacks three times since the start of July 2002.
A Saudi national and an unidentified individual attempted to hijack a Saudi airplane.  Both had attempted to fly the plane to the US but were convinced by the crew to return to the airport.  Security forces later subdued them.
A bomb exploded at a girls school in Qandahar, wounding one male member of the staff.  Afghan officials blame remnants of the Taliban and Al-Qaeda for the attack.  Under the Taliban regime, girls schools had been banned.
Shots were fired at an Israeli car near the Bardalah checkpoint in the northern part of the Jordan Rift Valley.  No one was hurt.
As part of a series of bombings, a farmers' building society was attacked in the northern half of the island of Corsica.  The Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC)-Union of Combatants claimed responsibility for the series of attacks which comes one week before French Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy is to visit the island.
The Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC)-Union of Combatants claimed responsibility for a coordinated series of fourteen bomb attacks that took place all over the island of Corsica on this evening.  As part of this attack, five banks in Ghisonaccia were damaged.  This wave of violence comes only one week before French Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy is to visit Corsica.
An explosive charge blew up near the settlement of Dugit.  There were no casualties.  Hamas' military wing, the Al-Qassem Brigades claimed responsibility for the attack.
Two bombs exploded thirty minutes apart in two department stores, killing 7 and injuring 144.  The first explosion occurred at 11:30 a.m. at the Shop-O-Rama Department Store.  Thirty minutes later there was another explosion at the adjacent Shoppers Central Store.  Both bombs were placed on counters and  bore similarities to the 2 October 2002 blasts that killed a US soldier and two Filipino men.
Three mortar shells and two Qassem-2 rockets were fired at settlements in the Gaza Strip.  No one was hurt.
Journalist Shahid Soomro was shot to death in front of his house at Mirzapur Mohalla in Kandhkot.  He was a correspondent for the Sindhi daily Kawish, and resisted the attackers who tried to kidnap him.  He was subsequently shot in the stomach.
Militants shot and killed a 9th class student in Kapran, Pulwama.
Two Palestinians rammed their car into an Egged bus at Karkur Junction near Pardes Hannah, a city about half-way between Tel Aviv and Haifa.  The car was packed with approximately 100 kg of nail-studded explosives.  Palestinian Islamic Jihad's Al-Quds Brigades claimed the attack which killed sixteen and injured forty-two.  The group, recently decimated by Israel Defense Forces attacks, is regrouping.
Militants shot and wounded a National Conference activist in Srinagar.
An explosive device, made of a fire extinguisher adapted with a detonator and ammonium nitrate, detonated at the entrance of Marcel Rudloff Secondary School outside Strasbourg.  The blast takes place one day before the visit of Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy to Strasbourg.
Six people were injured when a bomb detonated in a parked car on College Road in Rawalpindi.  The blast also damaged several other cars parked nearby.  This is the second explosion in Punjab province in four days, following an explosion in a Kamra market that killed one and injured twenty.  The explosives used in both blasts were similar in makeup.
Returning from Fortul where it had just dropped off equipment for oil exploration, a caravan of fifty-seven vehicles was the target of a car bomb attack.  The device had been planted on the road between Fortul and Tame (Arauca Department).  Authorities attribute the attack to the 45th Front of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC).
An unidentified body was recovered from Kachiwara, Budgam.
An explosive device blew up at the Bandung supermall, slightly wounding two people.  The devices were inside a cleaning cart in the basement of the mall and were apparently intended to frighten rather than kill.
Two girls' schools in Wardak province were set on fire by suspected former Taliban members.  The girls' parents in the area were warned not to send their daughters to school -- a practice forbidden under the Taliban regime.  No injuries were reported.  One of the attacks took place in the provincial capital Maydanshar and the other in an unnamed nearby town.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a teacher in Deval, Mahore, Udhampur.
A day after Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy, Justice Minister Dominique Perben, and Minister-Delegate in charge of Local Liberties Patrick Devedjian visited the area, an unspecified bank branch in Propriano was the target of a bomb attack that caused property damage but no injuries.Note:  The Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC) claimed responsibility for seven actions against banks on the island of Corsica in recent weeks.  It is unclear if this attack is one of the seven claimed.
Shots were fired at an Israeli car near Har Brakha in the Nablus area.  No one was hurt.
In a series of three nearly simultaneous explosions near the royal palace, an explosion in the parking lot of Jainepal Theatre wounded a security guard.Note:  These explosions occurred two days after the rebel leader Pushpa Kamal Dahal (also known as Prachanda) announced that he was willing to hold talks with the government to end the six-year insurgency.
The Myanmar Embassy received a birthday card with a detonator, lead wires and a battery inside.  A Metropolitan Police Department bomb squad was able to safely dispose of the device.  Police believe that the card, which was addressed to the Ambassador Aung Naing, was designed to explode upon opening.
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) rebels blew up a telecommunications station in Los Palmitos municipality (Sucre Department).
Two explosive devices were detonated against the Cordoba Municipality City Hall (Bolivar Department).  No one was injured or killed in the attack.  Authorities blame the 37th Front of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) for the attack.
Ban Na Kan community school in Saba Yoi district, Songkhla province was attacked by unidentified arsonists.  The attack was part of a coordinated set of arson and bomb attacks.  Four other schools were also burned: Ban Lam Plai, Ban Ta Paed and Wat Khonkha Sawat schools in Thepa district, and Ban Na Wa school in Chana district. One school burned to the ground, while the four others sustained varying amount of damage. While officials initially denied that the attacks were the work of terrorists, later arrests point to Islamic separatists.
Ban Na Wa school in Chana district school  in Thepa district, Songkhla province was attacked by unidentified arsonists.  The attack was part of a coordinated set of arson and bomb attacks.  Four other schools were also burned: Ban Na Kan community school in Saba Yoi district, Ban Ta Paed, Wat Khonkha Sawat, and  Ban Lam Plai  schools in Thepa district . One school burned to the ground, while the four others sustained varying amount of damage. While officials initially denied that the attacks were the work of terrorists, later arrests point to Islamic separatists.
A section of the Surtigas pipeline located in the rural area of Ovejas (Sucre Department) was attacked by unknown individuals.
Around 1:40 a.m., a bomb exploded, destroying a rail line in Protea South, Soweto.  A piece of track fell on a home, killed its female occupant, and wounded her male partner.  This attack was part of a coordinated series of bombings that took place in Soweto that night.
The 35th Front of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) detonated two explosive devices on the Ayachucho-Bovenas pipeline near rural San Miguel (between Rebombeo Sector and the Caribbean University Corps).  No fuel was spilled.
A group of armed men dragged Uvays Kirimov, secretary of the Oktyabrskoye administration, from his home in the Kurchaloy district southeast of Grozny and shot him dead.  The same night a local police officer was killed in a similar manner, possibly by the same armed group.
Sanjaya Singh Dnagol, the president of the Nepali Congress Kathmandu district No. 7, died from injuries incurred from being shot at by Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (CPN-M) rebels at his home in Panga in Kirtipur.
Unknown assailants threw a Molotov cocktail into the election office of the New Democracy Party (YTP).  The perpetrators left the statements of an illegal organization and escaped.  The attack takes place on the same weekend as voting all over the country took place.
Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (CPN-M) rebels bombed and destroyed village development committee buildings in Gagalphedi (Kathmandu Valley).  No further information is provided.
An explosive device was placed outside the window of a flower shop in Ajaccio.  The blast caused minor damage to the shop.  This is one of two explosive attacks on the island on this date.  Note:  The Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC) claimed responsibility for four actions on bars and shops in recent weeks.  It is unclear if this attack is included in that claim.
Fourteen people were injured in a bomb explosion at a hotel in Rajouri town in Jammu district.  No further information is available.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a Thachi, Banihal, man.
Two people were killed and sixty-nine wounded when a suicide bomber blew himself up at the entrance to Kfar Sava's open- air Arim shopping mall.  One of the dead was a security guard who is believed to have prevented the bomber from entering a Shekem electronic store, where a detonation would have caused higher numbers of casualties.  Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) claimed the attack, as did an unknown group calling itself the Jerusalem Group (or Battalions) and believed to be composed of both PIJ and al-Fatah activists.
Rebels traveling as passengers on a bus stopped the bus and set it on fire in east Nepal.  This incident is the latest in a series of incidents that have occurred despite intentions to hold peace talks to end a six-year insurgency.  Authorities blame the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (CPN-M) for this attack that killed two people and injured at least eight.
In a series of attacks on Village Development Committee (VDC) offices, Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (CPN-M) rebels set off explosives at the VDC offices in Balambu (Kathmandu district).
Near Larsana village in Poonch district, a group of suspected militants armed with automatic weapons and grenades attacked a vehicle that was carrying the body of a person who had died from natural causes.  They hurled a grenade at the vehicle and when the vehicle stopped, opened fire on it.  Four of the passengers were killed and one other was injured.
A bomb damaged a villa which belongs to the mayor of Bonifacio, a province in northern Corsica.  No further information is available.
Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (CPN-M) rebels set fire to the Panauti Municipality office in the Kavre district.
In a series of attacks on Village Development Committee (VDC) offices, Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (CPN-M) rebels set fire to a VDC office in Parasauni.
No one was injured when a bomb exploded at an estate agency in Saint-Florent.  No further information is provided.Note:  Incident date is approximate.
A bulldozer drove over an explosive charge in the hothouses of Morag settlement in the Qatif Bloc.  No one was hurt.
An unidentified gunman joined a crowd of people performing their Friday mid-day prayers at a mosque in Wawoora village in Lolab Valley in Kupwara district.  The gunman shot a policeman and two civilians.  The police officer and one of the civilians died of their wounds.
Unidentified attackers fired two rockets at a building in Pakistan's tribal areas where US officials are believed to be operating.  No injuries were reported.
An explosion at a pool hall in Kumanovo caused serious property damage, but no injuries.  It was thought that the explosion was likely caused by a Kasikara bomb of Chinese origin, which was thrown through a second floor window.  The motive for attack is unknown.
A bomb was thrown at the offices of the pro-Syrian Al-Saiga movement in the Ain al-Hilweh refugee camp near Sidon.  The offices were damaged as was a nearby mosque, two shops and a car parked across the street.  One person in the mosque was injured in the blast.
Mayoral offices of the Suba and Kennedy boroughs were attacked with small bombs.  No one was hurt, but the explosion caused minor property damage.
On the first day of a three-day national wide strike called by insurgents, Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (CPN-M) rebels blew up the Sun Kosi hydel power plant tower in Kavre district.
A small bomb exploded outside a Winners fast food restaurant in Juniyah, east of Beirut.  No one was hurt, but damage was caused to the building.  The explosion came thirty minutes after one at a Juniyah Pizza Hut and at about the same time as one at a Tripoli Pizza Hut.  The owner of Winners said that the restaurant is an entirely Lebanese enterprise.  There have been stream of low-level attacks against American fast food chains in Lebanon over the past year.
A section of the Cano Limon Covenas pipeline in El Loro hamlet (Convencion Municipality, Norte de Santander Department) was blown up by rebels from the Camilo Torres Restepo Front of the National Liberation Army (ELN).  Nearly 150,000 barrels of oil spilled into the El Loro Creek and the El Tarra River.
Two anti-tank mines were discovered and safely detonated in the hothouses of Morag settlement in the Qatif Bloc.
Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (CPN-M) rebels blew up a 22 KV transmission line in Pulckowki (Sindhupalchowk) and the office of the Jamuni Village Committee.  No injuries were reported.
A hand grenade was thrown at a Fatah office in the Ain al-Hilweh refugee camp near Sidon, wounding a guard.
As part of a spate of seven explosions on the island of Corsica, a bomb was detonated at the National Agronomic Research Institute (INRA) in San Giuliano.  Authorities are blaming underground groups for all seven attacks.Note: The Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique (INRA) was set up in 1946 and became a national public scientific and technological establishment in 1984 under the joint authority of the Ministries of Research and Agriculture. INRA has a threefold mission:  to guarantee consumers high-quality food, ensure that agricultural and agro-food companies are competitive, contribute to integrated land development and sustainable management of natural resources
Masked gunmen stopped a Red Cross convoy outside Grozny and kidnapped two Red Cross workers.
An explosion killed one person in Arbil.  The bomb was hidden in a mortar shell in a bag and was detonated in Arbil's Shorish district.
A man was shot to death by unidentified gunmen at his house in Karam Kantha in Udhampur district.
A villa in Tox, which was being restored, was partially destroyed by a bomb attack.  This is the most recent attack in a spate of explosions at villas all over Corsica.
In the Sulawesi area of Indonesia, a bomb was found in a local KFC outlet.  The device was homemade and blamed on militants from the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF).
A pipe bomb, reportedly thrown from a loyalist estate, was found in a nationalist area of Portadown.  Residents of twenty houses were evacuated in response to the attack, which is being labeled sectarian.Note:  Incident date is approximate.
Aldermen for the towns of Pandi (Cundinamarca Department), Utica (Cundina Marca Department), and El Toro (Valle del Cauca Department) were murdered this week.  No further information is provided. Note:  Incident date is approximate.
An unknown person threw an explosive device at the Oaza catering facility in Mostar, causing damage but no injuries.
A Palestinian fired shots at an Israeli car near the West Bank settlement of Rimonim, north-east of Ramallah, wounding two.  One of the Israelis later died from the injuries sustained during the attack.
Police recovered the body of an unidentified person from Kurinar in Kupwara district.
A day after a bomb explosion at a bus in Andhra Pradesh, the People's War Group (PWG) triggered bomb explosions at the railway station in Tumbalacherugu in the Guntur District.  No casualties were reported, but several long distance express trains were diverted.
Unidentified gunmen shot at and injured a man in Bonagam in the Shopian area of Pulwama district.
Two bombs exploded at the home of Jorge Maradiaga, a former lawmaker who ran two failed campaign bids to become the Liberal Party's presidential candidate in 1985 and 1989.  One bomb was hurled at his daughter's car, the other one landed on the roof of his house in the Iomas del Mayab neighborhood.  Maradiaga believes the attack was prompted by a comment he had made against the Maduro administration's new slogan, Government of the People.
Eleven people were killed and another forty-seven wounded when a suicide bomber blew himself up upon entering an Egged bus in Qiryat Menahem.  The bus was on its way into central Jerusalem.  The military wing of Hamas, the Izz-al-Din al Qassem Brigades, claimed the attack.
An Afghan woman working for a Japanese air agency (NERM) was shot and stabbed to death in her house in Charbolak district, 30 km west of Mazar-e Sharif.  Afghan women working for foreign NGOs had been a target of the Taliban.
Police recovered an unidentified body from Aboora village in the Beerwah area.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a shopkeeper in the Khanyar area of Khalifapora.
Puerto Rondon Mayor, Hector Yesid Gutierrez Vigoth and town Secretary, Sixto Cotrina were kidnapped by Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) rebels.  Both were found dead in a remote area outside Tame.  Note:  Puerto Rondon is one of twenty-six municipalities that are under military control.
Jammu and Kashmir's Minister of Rural Development, Peerzada Mohammad Sayeed, escaped unharmed when militants fired at his motorcade in Anantnag district.  This is the first attack on a minister since the new government took office.  This attack took place near Hiller village as Sayeed, a Congress leader, was visiting his constituency in south Kashmir.  Three policemen were injured in the attack, which was claimed by Al-Nasireen, a little-known militant group believed to be a shadow group of the Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT).
Unidentified people attacked a house belonging to the brothers of the governor of Khost province in eastern Afghanistan.  The governor, Mohammad Hakim Taniwal, also lives in the house (in Lalmi village, 25 km west of Khost) occasionally.  There are no reports of injuries.
A bomb exploded in front of the house of a Fatah official in southern Lebanon's Ain al-Hilweh refugee camp.  The house was damaged but no one was hurt.  The attack is the latest in a streak involving Palestinian infighting, mostly between Fatah and the PFLP-GC, whose office was attacked the day before.
A group of twenty students threw fifteen petrol bombs at Camp Bray, a US Military base in Seoul.  The attacks came after two US soldiers were acquitted in the deaths of two Korean children who were killed in a traffic accident.
Housewife Claudia Patricia Soto was killed by a group of rebels from the Oscar William Calvo Front of the Popular Liberation Army (EPL) for allegedly cooperating with the Army in the Quinchia municipality.
An explosive device detonated at a gendarme garage in Bastia.  This is one of three bomb attacks on this night on the island of Corsica.  The blast damaged the door of the garage and a vehicle parked inside.
Two rockets were fired at the Presidential Palace in Kabul.  One landed 150 meters away, damaging a restaurant opposite the Finance Ministry.  There is no information on what happened to the other rocket fired.  No one was injured in the attack, which originated in Bagram.
Five people were injured in an explosion at a mosque in Taloqan, the capital of the northern province of Takhar.  The attack took place as worshippers gathered for prayers at the end of the day's fasting for the Muslim holy month of Ramadan.
A suicide bomber blew himself up in the lobby of the Israeli owned and frequented Paradise Hotel.  Two more suicide attackers parked next to the hotel blew themselves up with a car bomb immediately after.  This attack occurred simultaneous to an attempt to down an Israeli airliner bound for Tel Aviv from the same city.  The attacks were said to mark the 55th anniversary of the partition of Palestine.  Al Qaeda claimed responsibility for the attack.
Two Palestinians attacked the Likud party headquarters in Beit She'an, killing six and wounding forty-three, before being shot and killed themselves.  The attack was claimed by the Fatah-linked Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades and came both during elections and just after a Brigade commander was assassinated by the Israeli Army.
A bomb went off in Jalalabad's Dand bazaar.  No one was hurt since the shops had closed and most people had gone home.  The device had been planted on a cart.
Alberto Duque, the mayor of Pocora, was kidnapped by Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) guerrillas.  He was released on 19 December 2002 in Caldas state.  It is not known if a ransom was paid for his release.Note:  Incident date is approximate.
Police recovered the bullet-riddled body of a man from Hathiwar in Ganderbal.
Militants shot at and injured three people outside their homes in Bhatoo village in the Bandipora area of Baramulla district.
A pipe bomb was thrown into the private home of a family of three in Londonderry.  The device failed to explode, causing no damage.
Militants shot and wounded a National Conference activist who was previously associated with the counter-insurgent Ikhwan group.
Perdomo Zamora, the owner and news editor of the radio station Parorama Estero and former city councilmen, was killed and his wife Sandra Jinet Caceres was wounded by gunmen.  No further information is available.
Unidentified gunmen killed a man at his home in Arin, in the Bandipora area of Varmul district.
A bomb went off in the busy area of Ghatkopar in Mumbai, killing two and injuring thirty-six more.  No one has claimed responsibility for the attack, which is reminiscent of similar attacks ten years ago.  A second bomb was also found on a bus later that evening.
Maoists belonging to the People's War Group (PWG) destroyed two buildings belonging to Harsha Real Estate's Dream City.  The rebels ordered the staff out, planted the bombs in the office buildings, burned records and torched a motorbike.  They also blew up a building with two floors that housed a guesthouse and a store room near Royapole, belonging to Harsha Real Estate.  This is one of many attacks in recent days marking the expansion of the PWG.
Three missiles hit Kabul, landing in the Aqa Ali Shams area and district No. 7.  No one was killed and no injuries were reported.
In the first of two bombings in the south Sulawesi capital of Makassar on this day, a bomb explosion ripped through a McDonald's in the Ratu Indah shopping mall.  Three people, including the bomber, were killed and two were injured in this explosion.   AFP reports on 11 April 2003 that Agung Hamid is believed to be the main suspect in this bombing and the car showroom explosion. AFP reported on 21 July that an Indonesian accused of helping to bomb the McDonald's restaurant testified that he had received weapons training in the Philippines.  Four others accused in this case have admitted being members of the Laskar Jundullah Islamic militia.  On 22 December 2003, an Indonesian court sentenced Galazi bin Abdul Somad to eighteen years in prison for his role in this attack.  Prosecutors say he was guilty of transporting the bomb before passing it on to the actual bombers.
Jesus Antonio Nunez Vargas, the mayor of Ambalema (Tolima Department), was killed by the 42nd Front of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC).  Authorities believe that on 4 December, he went to a secret meeting with FARC in a rural area near Bettran (Cundinamarca Department).  His body was found the following day.
Wat Tantikaram School, a temple school in Rangae district, Narathiwat province, was burned down, allegedly by a separatist group called the Young Liberators of Pattani (PMP). Police say that had received several letters from PMP warning they would carry out the attack and that more attacks on government workplaces, government officials, and their family members would occur in the future.
An explosive charge targeted a car in the town of Ibil al-Saqi inside the former border strip in southern Lebanon.  The two passengers were killed, one of which was a suspected Hezbollah collaborator.
In a string of bomb blasts at movie theaters around Mymenshingh, seventeen people were killed and nearly three hundred others wounded.  The theaters were just filling in with people who were celebrating the Id al-Fit festival, a holiday that celebrates the end of Ramadan.  Since the blast, Bangladesh Army officials have arrested top leaders from the Awami League and Jatiya Party Monju.
Authorities foiled an attempt made by People's War Group (PWG) to bomb, with landmines and other explosives, the Mandamarri railway station in the Adilabad district of Andhra Pradesh.    Earlier, station records were burned and two walkie-talkie sets taken by PWG rebels.
Two small bombs, made of quarry explosives, were left in trash cans outside a police headquarters in Genoa.  The blast caused minor damage and came as tension in the city over policing is on the rise.  This attack comes a week after prosecutors determined that the murder of an anti-globalization protester during the 2001 Group of Eight Summit in Genoa was police self-defense and not a criminal act.Note:  A group calling itself July 20th (named after the date an anti-globalization protestor was killed by police in 2001) claimed responsibility for this attack.  The letter left by the group said it was in response to the ...torture and systematic violence perpetuated in streets and police barracks in a vain attempt to repress the people's response against the G-8 Summit.
Police recovered the bullet-riddled body of a man in Jhamalan Shadan, Udhampur.
A local woman reported seeing two men leave a cardboard box in the bushes near a road outside Gudermes.  Federal forces investigated and found that it contained explosives.  The bomb experts destroyed the device.
A man was gunned down by militants in his house in Joura village in the Gandoh area of Doda district.
A homemade bomb exploded in a tax office on Caballero Street in Barcelona, causing considerable damage to the inside of the building.  The device started a fire that was extinguished by the fire brigade.  On 22 September 2003, police arrested Guillem G.B., an ex-member of a Catalan separatist organization that they accuse of perpetrating this attack and three others in Barcelona in 2002.  When police searched his home they recovered a handgun, an air rifle, fake personal documents, a computer and disks and documents of a radical nature.
For the third time in two months, the National Liberation Army (ELN) has blown up the pipeline supplying Bucaramanga with natural gas.  The company that operates the pipeline reported that it was damaged in a rural part of Santander province.
The house of a Khanater, Poonch man was set on fire.  No injuries were reported.
Police recovered the dead body of a man from Gulshan Abad Botakadal, Hawal (Srinagar) from Chak Razaq Khan village in Pattan.  He had been shot in the temple and had worked as a senior inspector in the Department of Handicrafts.  The man had been kidnapped the day before.
An explosive blast that occurred in a banana shop in Balikesir Province killed one person and injured six others.  The banana shop was located in a busy marketplace.  No further information is available.
Two days after two bomb explosions in Bogota, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) was blamed for a grenade explosion that occurred at the concert performed in the El Castillo bullring in Meta Department.  The explosion injured at least eleven people, including singers Miguel Angel Yanez and Elever Otalona.
Two people were killed and four others injured when militants threw a grenade in Rajouri's main commercial center, near a bank.
A fifth in a series of parcel bombs was found at a post sorting room at the RAI Italian broadcasting corporation.  Two mail sorters were handling the parcel when it caught fire in the mail room.  Fortunately neither man was injured.  This is the fifth device of its kind to be sent through the mail, but the first that targeted an Italian corporation.
Israel Defense Forces disposal experts detonated a 10 kg explosive charge that was found in Hebron's Imrah campground.
Km 45 of the Cano Limon-Covenas pipeline in rural Araquita (Arauca Department) was attacked.  No further information is provided.
A bomb detonated in a vacant lot in Istanbul's Kadikoy district while bomb disposal experts were examining a banner left by an illegal organization.  The explosion, which didn't cause any casualties, occurred next to the Sogutlucesme Bridge, where the banner hung.
Two women, who were cousins, were beheaded while a third was shot dead in Hasiot village of Rajouri district, about 95 miles from Kashmir's winter capital, Jammu.  All three were between the ages of 19-20, and their fathers had been killed by militants several months earlier.  Two days before the girls' deaths, militants from Lashkar-e-Jabba (LeJ) had put up posters at the girls' college warning female students to war burkas and male students to wear sherwanis (traditional coats).  The three women had not worn the burkas and may have been targeted as a result.
250 kg of C-4 was found on a bus, carrying forty passengers, en route to Usme.  The explosive device was found under a seat.
Israel Defense Forces soldiers found an unexploded mortar shell in the Gadid settlement hothouses.  Border Police bomb disposal experts safely blew it up.
Militants shot dead People's Democratic Party member of the legislative assembly, Abdul Aziz Mir, as he was returning from Friday prayers in Pampore, on the outskirts of Srinagar.  A little-known group, calling itself, Save Kashmir Movement, claimed the attack.  The group is believed to be a front for the Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT).  Others believe that the LeT front, Al-Nasineen, also claimed the attack.
Two explosions occurred in Jalalabad, near the city hospital.  There were no reported injuries.
In the Darhal area of Jammu division, militants entered the house of a woman and beheaded her.  This could be part of a recent crackdown by militants on women they believe to be inappropriately dressed.
Explosions at the Difens Road destroyed two gas tanks, fourteen machines and electric generators, and several vehicles.  Authorities later concluded that the explosions were caused by explosive devices planted by an unidentified terrorist group.
A bus, transporting sixteen workers to the Cano Limon oil fields, was stopped and dynamited.  Two were killed and eleven wounded in this explosion perpetrated by suspected Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) rebels.
A man and his wife were shot dead by unidentified gunmen at Kalaban village in the Chasana area of Udhampur district.
Nine people were injured in a bomb blast at Rawalpindi's Pir Wadhai bus station.  The bomb weighed 0.5 kg and was placed in a bag of peanuts near the passengers' stand.
A bomb exploded outside the home of Mayor Saudie Ampatuan in the Datu Piang town of Maguindanao, killing him and twelve other people.  The remote-detonated bomb, consisting of an 81-mm mortar bomb placed in a plastic bag with nails, twisted wires and a substantial amount of ammonium nitrate, also caused heavy property damage.  Authorities have blamed the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF); the MILF have denied their accusations.  Since the blast, the Philippine Army has deployed several hundred troops to the area to prevent retaliatory fighting.
Unidentified gunmen entered the house of a government schoolteacher, after he denied them sanctuary for the evening, and shot him and his two sons dead.  Police suspect that the Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) is responsible.
Approximately thirty-armed Naxalites of the People's War Group (PWG) stormed the house of ruling Telugu Desam Party (TDP) local-level leader and Mulugu Agricultural Marketing Committee chairman Aka Radhakrishna in Thimmampet village of Mangapet mandal, ordered the family to vacate the house, and set off four explosives.  The house was destroyed by the explosion and the family claims that nearly 25g of gold and silver ornaments were missing.  A note left at the site states that the TDP leader had carried out the party's membership drive in the region despite orders to not do so.
People's War Group (PWG) blew up a telephone exchange in Madhapur village, Karimnagar district,  after asking its staff to vacate the premises.
A small bomb, hidden in a plastic bag, exploded in front of an office of the National Communications Enterprise, Telecom, in Santa Marta's El Rodadero beach, injuring three people and causing property damage.
Tigran Naghdalian, head of state television, was shot in the head and killed by an unknown gunman as he left his parents' house in Yerevan.  Naghdalian was a key supporter of President Robert Kocharian, who was up for re-election on 19 February and has suggested the opposition is responsible for the murder.
An explosion damaged a 100 ft. high bust of former President Ferdinand Marcos, blowing off its eyes and nose.  The New People's Army (NPA) claimed responsibility for the attack, stating that it was perpetrated on the request of the Ibaloi tribe, displaying their anger towards the past fascist dictatorship as well as the failure of succeeding regimes from that of President Corazon Aquino up to the present to punish the Marcoses and their henchmen.  Note:  Associated Press reports that the bust had been bombed once in the late 1980s.
Unidentified militants slit the throat of a man in Kara Kadal, Takiyabal, Bijbehara.  The man was believed to be a police informer.
Gunfire was directed at an Israeli bus on the Tunnels Road.  There were no casualties, but the bus was damaged.
Unidentified gunmen shot dead a property dealer and injured his driver on the outskirts of Channi Himkat as they were driving.
One day after National Liberation Army (ELN) guerrillas declared a blockade on San Luis, local authorities discovered that five local bus drivers had been shot and their buses burned.  Later that day, the town suffered blackouts and local authorities believe that this was also the result of ELN activities.
Police recovered the body of a man with a bomb-like object tied to it from Keller village in Pulwama district.
A home-made explosive device was found near Netanya on the coastal highway and safely defused.
A pair of suicide bombers blew themselves up 500 feet and 30 seconds apart- the first in front of a bus stop, the second next to a currency exchange kiosk in a pedestrian mall- in a Tel Aviv neighborhood home to many foreign workers and a local transportation hub.  Over 100 people were injured (approximately 108) and 23 were killed, including two people from China, two from Romania, one from Ghana and one from Bulgaria.  Nails, ball bearings, and metal pieces had been planted in the bombs to sharpen their effect.  The attack was the first suicide bombing since 21 November 2002 and the deadliest attack since a March 2002 suicide bombing that took 29 lives (as well as the second deadliest attack of the current intifada, which began in September 2000).  Both Palestinian Islamic Jihad's (PIJ) al-Quds Squads and the al-Fatah linked al-Aqsa Brigades claimed the attack; the al-Aqsa Brigades rescinded their claim but had identified the bombers.  In March 2005, a court indicted Mu'afaq Iruk, an Israeli Arab, to forty-two years in prison for this bombing.  According to the court, Iruk was responsible for transporting the two suicide bombers to the site.
Hezbollah fired anti aircraft shells in the vicinity of Birait in the western sector of the Lebanese border.  No one was hurt and no damage was caused.
Police recovered three headless bodies from Hassanoor village near Ashmuqam, Islamabad.  All were identified as residents of Hapatnar, Islamabad, and included a father and son.  The man's other son, a prominent pro-government fighter, had been killed three months earlier.
Border Police bomb disposal experts discovered a large explosive charge near Nahal Oz, north of the Gaza Strip.  They safely detonated it.
A Muslim laborer was killed when a suspected militant opened fire on an alleged informer, but missed his target and hit the laborer instead.  The attack took place at the main bus stand of a northern Baramulla town.
A large bomb, made of explosives and sodium chlorate, was left in front of a public revenue office in Bastia.  Only the detonator exploded, causing no serious damage.
Two Palestinian youths, one armed with a knife (aged 12 and 14), entered the Gaza settlement of Netzarim and tried to stab one of the resident children.  A settler fired at the Palestinians, wounding one.
Two Palestinian gunmen opened fire on Moshav Gadish in the Afula area just north of the West Bank, killing one resident.  Both gunmen were killed (one shot, the other run over) by Israeli soldiers in the ensuing stand-off.  Three Israeli soldiers and one civilian was wounded in the aftermath as well.
Resistenza Corsa, a banned nationalist group, claimed responsibility for an explosive charge that detonated at Fanny's Club, a bar in Bastia.  The blast caused extensive damage to the premises.  The motive for the attack is unknown.
A former militant was shot dead by an unidentified gunman in Bemina soon after being released from jail.
A homemade explosive device, made of four cooking gas canisters, four bottles of gasoline and four bottles of another liquid chemical, but no detonator, was found inside the Sacre Coeur church in Paris.  The church, which is one of Paris' most visited tourist sites, was evacuated while bomb experts deactivated the device.  The potential attack comes at a time of heightened vigilance against terror attacks in Europe.
Border guards discovered a powerful bomb planted by suspected militants in Hajan township north of Srinagar.  The bomb was most likely intended for state assembly member and local National Conference leader Akbar Lone, who was to visit the area soon.  The bomb had been planted along the main road.
Joy Kumar Tripura, the North Gokulnagar Village Council chairman in West Tripura district, was abducted by the National Liberation Front of Tripura (NLFT) and was released a week later on 22 January.  The motive for his abduction is unknown.
A hotel that was under construction in the Haute-Corse Department on the island of Corsica was damaged by a bomb blast.  No further information is available.
Alexis Papakhelas and Tasos Telloglou, both journalists from To Vima and authors of a book on the Greek terrorism group, November 17 (17N), were attacked as they signed copies of their book at a bookshop.  About fifteen masked perpetrators threw tear gas and red paint at the authors, causing panic but no injuries.  This is being labeled an attack on freedom of the press.
A car bomb exploded in a village located in Meta Province as local authorities were attempting to defuse it.  The explosion damaged twenty-one homes, but did not cause any casualties.  The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) are thought to be responsible.
A mortar exploded, killing livestock and wounding one person.  The act was attributed to Eritrean sympathizers.  Senior officials in the area may have been the target.
Militants attacked a house in Koteranka, Rajouri, killing the owner, his wife and three children.
A group of five or six militants entered the village of Bajmasta in the Sumbar area of Ramban tehsil in Doda district and kidnapped two Village Defense Committee members from their houses.  They were taken away and shot, their bodies recovered the next morning.
An American was killed and another wounded when shots were fired on their jeep while at the intersection of Highway 85 and Abu Dhabi Road, north of Kuwait City and three miles away from Camp Doha- the headquarters of the US military in Kuwait.  The victims were both civilian contractors for the US military from Tapestry Solutions Corporation, a San Diego software development company.  Executive Vice President Michael Rene Pouliot, age 46, was killed and senior software engineer David Caraway was wounded.  It is believed the gunman or gunmen fired from behind bushes using a Kalashnikov rifle.  This is the third such attack on the US military and its contractors in three months in Kuwait.
An explosive device, which was hidden in the luggage department of a minibus that transports personnel of the Supreme Court of Appeals, detonated, causing material damage.  The explosion took place as the bus was parked at the court building and in the early morning hours.
Unidentified gunmen fired on the house on a Congress Block president in the Gandoh area of Doda district.  As they fled from the scene, the attackers hurled a grenade towards the house.  The device exploded, injuring four of the residents including the Congressman's son and daughter.  The owner was not hurt.
Shots were fired at an Israeli car near Shilo.  No one was hurt but the car was damaged.
People's War Group (PWG) killed the ruling Telegu Deam Party leader in Warangal by taking him to a forest area.  The name of the leader varies by information source.  Syed Dawood in an Indian Paper; Basha in SATP.  It is clear that he was beaten and died of multiple injuries.  The motive for his killing is unknown.
Jose Oliver Pacres, a former New People's Army (NPA) leader, survived an ambush in Salawag village by suspected members of the Sparrow Unit, a communist hit squad.  After leaving the NPA, Pacres has been active in the government's campaign to stop other insurgency groups, such as the Solidarity of Cavite Workers.
Unidentified gunmen shot dead a man in downtown Srinagar.
A donkey laden with explosives blew up next to an Israeli bus along the Jerusalem-Etzyan Bloc road near al-Khidr.  No one was hurt.  The military wing of Hamas, the al-Qassem Brigades, claimed the attack.
Thirteen members of the People's War Group (PWG) remote detonated explosives at the Raghunath cinema in Atmakur (Andhra Pradesh), causing damage to the projector room and equipment.  The cinema is located 50 meters away from the police station.
The National Democratic Front of Bodoland (NDFB) terrorists killed a school teacher in Nadihira village (Barpeta district, Assam).
A house in Dunmurry that belongs to a couple and two children was the target of a petrol bomb attack.  The couple said they heard a bang outside their front door and when they opened it, saw flames.  Petrol had also been spread on the couple's car and garage door.  Authorities are calling this attack sectarian.
Unidentified gunmen abducted a suspected army informer from his residence at Adoora, Mawar in the Handwara area of Kupwara district.  They then shot him dead.
Two bombs exploded in the Ville Parle suburb of Mumbai.  The first bomb exploded in a Ville Parle suburb near a row of grocery stores, injuring twenty-seven people.  Four hours later, a second bomb exploded, but the exact target is unknown.  Responsibility for the incident varies by source, but some suspect that the blasts were likely the work of the Students' Islamic Movement of India (SIMI), a banned Islamist student group seeking to establish India as an Islamic state.Note:  AFP reports that the police allege that explosions occurring on 2 December on a bus and 6 December at a McDonald's restaurant were also masterminded by SIMI.
Two explosive devices were placed outside a building holding Electrocosta offices.  One was defused by local authorities, but the other detonated.  Neither bombs caused any injuries.  However, a third explosive device detonated- at the same time- outside the home of the Teheran Narvaez family, injuring two people.
Two mortar shells were fired at Qatif Bloc settlement in the Gaza Strip.  No one was hurt.
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) members kidnapped Hollman Vargas Estefan, the mayor of Sacama.  FARC told local news sources that they kidnapped Vargas to force him to resign.
A time bomb, which was left in a McDonald's fast food restaurant in the Merter district of Istanbul, was made safe by bomb experts.  The device had been placed in a box and left under tables on the first floor of the premises.
National Liberation Front of Tripura (NLFT) rebels abducted five railway workers from the Dhalai district of Tripura.  No further information is provided.
A Communist Party of India- Marxist (CPI-M) activist was killed by gunmen from the National Liberation Front of Tripura (NLFT) in New Dalapatipara, Dhalai district.  Such violence has been common as competing factions have been vying for winning upcoming elections to be held on 26 February.
Militants entered a house in Adoora-Mawar in Handwara, kidnapped the owner, and later shot him dead.
A couple of yards from a police outpost at the Taherpur bazar in Bagmara subdivision, the Bangladesh's Nationalist Party's (BNP) district Vice President, Abdul Wahed Mondol, was killed by gunmen from the Purbo Banglar Communist Party (PBCP), an outlawed left wing extremist group.
Ansar al-Islam, an al-Qaeda linked Islamist group operating in northern Iraq, assassinated Shawkat Hajji Mushir, a member of the Kurdish parliament and a founder of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK).  A team of Ansar gunmen pretending to negotiate a large scale defection of Ansar fighters (120 approximately) to the PUK met with Mushir at a home in the village of Qamesh Tapa, ostensibly to finalize the terms of the transfer.  Mushir was shot dead as he finalized the letter summarizing their meeting, and two officials who had accompanied him were promptly shot dead outside the home.  The gunmen then opened fire on the village itself, killing three civilians and injuring twelve.  One of the wounded later died of her injuries.  This attack was the third assassination attempt by Isalmists against Kurdish leaders in northern Iraq since 2001.  Two more Kurds- men sent to Ansar to guarantee the safety of its own men at the talks- were taken hostage as well.
The Real Irish Republican Army (RIRA) claimed responsibility for an attempted bomb attack on the PSNI police station in east Belfast.  An elderly man found the device in a back alley near the police station and behind his house- he lifted up the device and carried it to his home before calling the police.  The bomb was made safe by bomb experts.  In their claim of responsibility, the RIRA stated, These attacks against the PSNI will continue as long as they are administering British rule in Ireland.
Manjurul Islam Ashru and Bappi Sinha, two former leaders of the Bangladesh Chhatra League (BCL), were shot dead by an unidentified group near the Government Staff Quarters at Dhanmondi.  Authorities suspect that both may have been killed over a dispute in establishing supremacy in the area.  Relatives believe that the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP) is responsible.
Pro-Taliban forces attacked the home of a pro-US goods supplier's home in the Darmal area of Aghanistan's southeastern province of Paktia.  The supplier, Sher Mohammad Amin, was in Kabul at the time of the attack and no injuries were reported.
A rocket was fired at the main bazaar of the southeastern Afghan border town of Spin Boldak during the Muslim festival of Eid al-Adha.  A shop was destroyed but no injuries were reported.  A second rocket fell near the border.  Officials blame anti-government forces, which could mean either al Qaeda or Taliban remnants, or forces loyal to warlord Gulbuddin Hekmadyar.  US special forces had just finished their biggest offensive since March 2002 against rebels who had been holed up in a mountain cave network 20 km north of the border town.
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) guerrillas shot down a small airplane with four US government personnel and one pilot from Colombia.  It appears likely that the Americans were intelligence officers on a routine mission near Caqueta, a drug producing area.  The attack was planned by the deputy commander of the Teofilo Forero column, which primarily conducts urban operations.  The pilot and an American were shot; the other two were kidnapped.Note:  The names of the three Americans shot down were released in April 2003.  Keith Stansell, Marco Gonzalves and Thomas R. Howes, civilians doing drug surveillance for the Department of Defense, have been missing since they were shot down on 13 February.
Rahaman Alan Hazil Mohammed, from Venezuela, was arrested in London's Gatwick Airport after authorities found a live grenade in his luggage.  Mohammed had flown on a British Airways flight from Caracas before the device was found.  The north terminal of Gatwick was closed while authorities disposed of the grenade.  Mohammed is being held in a London jail for possession of a grenade for terrorist purposes.
A group of Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) supporters threw a fire bomb at a nursery school in Van Province.  The fire that was caused by the blast caused major damage to the school.  Witnesses say the group was shouting slogans in support of Abdullah Ocalan during the attack.
A powerful homemade explosive device was found primed at a low-income housing complex in the outskirts of Turin.  The device was made of nine sticks of quarry dynamite, nails and a remote-control cell, all connected to a car battery.  Had the device exploded, much damage would have been caused.  Police, who safely defused the bomb, are unclear about the motive for this attack.
Four people threw a fire bomb at a supermarket in Izmir Province.  There were no reports of any injuries or damages caused by the blast.
Two Communist Party of India-Marxist (CPI-M) supporters from Karnasinghpara village, Dhalai district were abducted and later killed by the National Liberation Front of Tripura (NLFT).  Such violence has been common in Tripura as competing factions have been vying for winning upcoming elections to be held on 26 February.
A pipe bomb, which was pushed through the letterbox of a flat in Armagh city exploded, causing damage to the door and carpet of the flat.  There were no reported injuries.
Rabicharan Debbarma, a Communist Party of India-Marxist (CPI-M) activist, killed by gunmen from the National Liberation Front of Tripura (NLFT) in Kakraicherra village.  This source reports that the NLFT used choppers on him before shooting him dead.
Two nail bombs were thrown over the perimeter fence of the PSNI station on Antrim Road in north Belfast.  One of the devices exploded in the yard, causing no damages or injuries and the second failed to explode.  The devices were said to have been meant to harm people in the area.  A caller from the Continuity Irish Republican Army (CIRA) admitted responsibility on behalf of his group.
Ecoterrorists are being blamed for setting fire to a relay station belonging to Omnitel, a telephone company in Terni Province.   Authorities believe that the perpetrators probably sprinkled the station with flammable liquid before setting it alight.  At the scene graffiti was found that said, Free Marco- free everybody, which probably referred to jailed Swiss anarchist Marco Camenish.Note:  Incident date is approximate.
Mangalchand Jharra, a Communist Party of India- Marxist (CPI-M) activist, was dragged from his home in Radhanagara village and shot dead by gunmen from the National Liberation Front of Tripura (NLFT).
Robert Dent, a British employee of British Aerospace Engineering in Riyadh was shot and killed by a gunmen, as he sat waiting in his vehicle at a light.  The gunmen was identified as a Yemen-born naturalized Saudi, who had named his youngest son Osama.  Police believe he may be an al-Qaeda sympathizer.
An European Union Police Mission (EUPM) van was the target of a bomb attack on the night between 22-23 February.  The van was parked in front of an EUPM official's home.  No further information is provided.
Loyalists are blamed for throwing a crude explosive device at a Catholic home in Lurgan.  The device exploded at the front door of the home, causing minor damage.  A second device was found in the front garden and made safe by bomb experts.  Police believe this attack to be sectarian.  Note:  The Loyalist Volunteer Forces (LVF) are the most likely perpetrators of this attack according to authorities.
Two unidentified attackers attempted to throw an incendiary bomb at a McDonalds fast food restaurant in al-Dammam.  The two perpetrators drove up to the restaurant in their car, one of them got out and threw the bomb at the premises, but it failed to detonate.  The perpetrator attempted to re-light the fuse, but it still did not detonate.  Police arrested one man later who had chemicals on his clothing that matched those found at the scene.  No group claimed responsibility.
On election day, the vehicle that election workers were traveling in was ambushed by the All Tripura Tiger Force (ATTF), a group seeking autonomy for the state in northeastern India.  Authorities say that four election workers were wounded and five security officers and a civilian driver were killed.
Two gunmen on a motor bike fired shots at the Ajaccio law courts.  The perpetrators opened fire while people were passing by, but no one was injured.  The attackers managed to escape on foot after the attack.
Two policemen were killed and another seven people wounded when a police camp outside the US consulate in Karachi was attacked by a gunman.  The attacker, armed initially with only a pistol, took the sub-machine gun of one of the guards and opened fire.  The seven injured included five policemen, one Ranger, and one civilian passerby.  The captured attacker stated, I wanted to punish the policemen who were protecting the infidels, responsible for the killings of innocent Muslims.  There may have been a second assailant, providing cover-fire from a motorcycle.  The attack outside, and indirectly on, the US Consulate follows a 14 June 2002 suicide car bomb attack on it that killed 11 Pakistanis (plus the bomber).  The mission was relocated two months later and its location kept secret for several months.  This latest attack comes as anti-American sentiment in Pakistan is rising sharply due to a combination of the war on terror and possible war on Iraq.  The Pakistani authorities and press, as usual, suggest the Indian intelligence agency (RAW- Research and Analysis Wing) could be involved in the attack.
A police sergeant was killed and ten others were wounded (four seriously) when at least three powerful bombs were thrown at the International Trade Fair at the Circuit House Maiden in Khulna.  Neither the perpetrators nor the motive for the attack were reported.
IDF soldiers discovered a large explosive charge in Gaza's Netzarim area and Border Police bomb disposal experts detonated it.
A car bomb exploded between the houses of Antonio Melian, a controversial opposition leader, and the environmental protection manager of the US based company Chevron.  It is not clear which house the bomb was intended to attack although both have been involved in a movement that opposes the Chavez administration.  The bomb caused material damage to both properties and several others close by, but no one was injured.
A mortar shell landed in one of the Qatif Bloc settlements, injuring no one.
Unknown attackers set fire to a temporary school near the southern Afghan city and former Taliban stronghold of Qandahar.  The Shah Mahmood Hotak school in Shekh Mamado, three miles south of Qandahar, gave primary-level education to mixed classes of boys and girls and had received supplies from UNICEF (the United Nations Children's Fund).  No injuries were reported.
A bomb went off outside the World Food Programme (WFP) in the eastern city of Jalalabad.  No one was injured.  It was the third attack on the agency in five weeks.
Two mortar shells were fired at Netzarim settlement in the Gaza Strip.  No one was injured and no damage was caused.
A pipe bomb was found by a 14-year-old Catholic girl in the laneway of her home in Ballymena.  The girl carried the device into her house and it was kept there until her older brother found it suspicious and called police.  The device was not lit but could have still detonated if dripped.  The bomb was removed without incident.
Seven children were injured when an improvised bomb planted in a bottle detonated outside a house in Bakht Abad, in the Zir Koh district of Heart province in northwestern Afghanistan.  The home belonged to Nasir Khan, one of warlord Amanullah Khan's commanders.  Amanullah claimed the bomb blast was instigated by Tajik provincial governor Ismail Khan, who has been fighting with Amanullah for control of the area.  A spokesman for the governor blames the attack on remnants of the Taliban.
An explosive device was removed from outside a mosque in Tana River District and safely detonated by authorities.Note:  Source notes that the incident may have occurred on 8 March or 15 March of 2003.
A villa that belongs to a retired gendarme and was under construction was bombed in Conca, on the island of Corsica.  The villa was destroyed by the blast.
The Animal Liberation Front (ALF) claimed responsibility for attacking a McDonalds fast food restaurant in Chico, California with burning debris.  The premises were damaged by the fire and the words Liberation and ALF were spray-painted on the walls.  This is the second attack on McDonalds restaurants in Chico in this month.  The ALF targets McDonalds because they are seen as a symbol of the United States corporate dominance and encroaching lifestyle, as well as for use of animal products.
Two men were found lying outside a supermarket in Cullaville after being attacked by dissident republicans.  Some sources report that the men had been shot but police could not confirm that.  One of the men died of his wounds to the chest, the other man suffered leg injuries.  Police say the attack was probably carried out by dissident republicans who are opposed to the Good Friday Agreement.
Unidentified gunmen killed two civilians from Sangla Surankot.
Two Israelis were wounded in a shooting attack on their car in the Musrara neighborhood of Jerusalem.  The gunman fled in the direction of the Old City.
In what some consider to be an Anniversary Bombing, a bomb exploded in the first class carriage of the commuter train in Mumbai, killing eleven and injuring seventy more.  Authorities believe that the Students Islamic Movement of India (SIMI) and the Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) were involved in this bomb blast that was to mark the anniversary of previous attacks on trains in Mumbai.  This explosion was similar to the 2 December 2002 attacks led by the Pakistani SIMI.
A bomb went off at the grand mosque of Lashkargah city in Afghanistan's southwestern Helmand province, injuring four worshippers.  Local officials blame remnants of the Taliban for the attack.
An explosive charge that consisted of about 50 kg of explosives detonated at the General Council building in Ajaccio.  The blast caused extensive damage to the building, completely destroying the entrance and first floor.
A mortar shell was fired at an unspecified Gaza Strip settlement.  No one was hurt.
Several Qassem rockets were fired at Sederot.  No one was hurt.  The military wing of Hamas, the Izz-ad-Din al-Qassem Brigades, claimed the attack.
Militants shot dead an alleged security force informer in the village of Chakepohru in southwestern Pulwama district.  The man was a Kashmiri Sikh.
A woman left a cardboard box near the Agriculture Ministry in Quito; the box contained explosive devices.  After this first attack, another bomb exploded in the same area.  Each bomb contained pamphlets from the People's Revolutionary Militias (MRP).
An explosive device detonated at a bar-restaurant in Ajaccio, on the island of Corsica.  No one was injured in this blast.  No further details are provided.
Two days before elections were to be held on the Chechen constitution, Chechen rebels destroyed a polling station in the Yalkhoy-Mokhk village of Kurchaloyevskiy district.Note:  On 23 March, Chechens approved a new constitution that declares Chechnya to be a part of Russia.
Two men from Lever Pahalgam were kidnapped and later killed by unidentified gunmen.  A third man is still missing.
At least four people were killed, including an Australian cameraman, and nine others injured when a suicide car bomber blew himself up at a checkpoint in Sayed Sadiq.  The bomber drove up to the car carrying cameraman, Paul Moran and another journalist Eric Campbell, both from the Australian Broadcasting Corp. (ABC) and blew himself up.  The extremist Ansar al-Islam group claimed responsibility for the attack, stating that it was carried out in retaliation for US air strikes against Ansar al-Islam strongholds.
Heinrich Wolfgang, a German NGO worker, was abducted by members of the Kuki Liberation Army (KLA) and later released on 9 April 2003, with no ransom being paid.  The KLA reportedly picked up the international worker to inquire about NGO activity in the area, as a KLA spokesman said that part of the German money to help people affected by the Naga-Kuki clash as being misused.
The People's Revolutionary Militias Group (MRP) claimed an attack on the British Consulate on Sunday, 23 March 2003.  The explosive device caused minor damage.  The Consul stated that the perpetrators conducted the attack in response to the war in Iraq.
A group of Bodo Liberation Tigers (BLT) killed a journalist of a newspaper on the same day as various other acts of violence from different factions of Bodo terrorists.  No motivation for the attack was provided.
A grenade attack in a Koronadal public market killed a district chairman and his bodyguard.  It is unclear from the reporting if they were the intended target.  No further information is provided.
Unidentified gunmen shot dead an alleged security force informer from Haril in Batagund.
A group of four gunmen entered a house in Phera village in Mendhar tehsil of Poonch district and injured four of the residents.
On the same day that a bomb exploded in front of a telecommunications office, police report that another bomb was found at Mahabandula Park, which faces the U.S. Embassy.  It is unclear whether the Embassy was the intended target and no further information is provided.
An explosive charge detonated under the engine bloc of a private car belonging to a police superintendent assistant of the intelligence department of Ajaccio police.  The attack took place as the car was parked in the officer's driveway.  No one was injured.  The blast came only a few hours after Interior Minister, Nicolas Sarkozy met with the members of Corsica's General Council in Paris to discuss the island's institutional evolution.Note:  Six members of the Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC) were arrested on 31 March in connection with recent attacks on the island.  It is not clear if this is one of those attacks.
Unknown individuals threw a petrol bomb at a synagogue in Massy, in the southern suburbs of Paris.  The device exploded and partially burnt the wall of the premises.  The assailants were able to escape after the attack.
A suicide bomber blew himself up outside a caf in the coastal town of Netanya, wounding thirty.  The bomber was prevented from entering Caf London and instead detonated near the entrance.  The wounded included nine soldiers.  This was the first Palestinian suicide bombing since the war in Iraq began.  It also took place on Land Day, an annual day of marches and protests by Israeli-Arabs against land seizures.  The last such attack took place in Haifa on 5 March 2003 and killed seventeen.  The Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ) claimed the attack, calling it Palestine's gift to the heroic people of Iraq.
A group of unidentified militants surrounded the house of Choudhary Talib Hussain- a senior National Conference leader and member of Parliament- in the Fatehpur area of Rajouri district.  They hurled grenades at the house and afterwards opened fire.  Security guards posted at the house returned fire in a firefight that lasted approximately thirty minutes.  Militants then fled the scene.  No one was hurt; Hussain and his family were not present at the time of the attack.
Militants gunned down a Congress activist in Wagella village in the Kreeri area of Baramullah district as he was returning home.
The body of an unidentified person was recovered by police in the Tral area of Pulwama district.
Cesar Jose Elias Crus, a political leader and former Cesar Department assemblyman, was abducted on the road from Pailitas to Curumani, in the Cesar Department.  The identity and motive of the perpetrators are not known.  Elias was previously abducted two years ago by members of the National Liberation Army (ELN).
Kalasani Janardhan Reddy, an activist of the ruling Telugu Desam Party (TDP), was killed in Toggudem village (Pinapaka mandal, Khamman district).  People's War Group (PWG) claimed that Reddy was an informer.
A high pressure resonance bomb exploded at a United Postal Service office (UPS) in Istanbul on the same night that an explosion rocked the British Consulate in the same city.  The blast took place near the wall that surrounds the UPS building and shattered the windows of a nearby shop and pharmacy.  The motive for the attack is not cited but anti-American and British sentiment is high in Turkey because of the war in Iraq.
Hours after three mosques were bombed in Davao City, unidentified persons hurled a grenade at the Caltex gas station, injuring four gas station employees.  While authorities suspect the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) to be responsible, MILF spokesman Bid Kabalu has denied responsibility.
A 2 kilogram charge of R-1 explosives and a 60 mm grenade disguised in a soccer ball were found and destroyed by marine infantry troops near Carmen de Bolivar and San Javinto.  The explosives are believed to belong to the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC).
Suspected guerrillas dynamited a radio station transmitter in the southern province of Huila.  The charges interrupted the transmissions of the Timana Stereo Radio, an affiliate of the national RCN network, and knocked out telephone service to several towns.  It was also reported that transmitters and equipment owned by the state-owned telephone company Telecom were destroyed.  The area is a stronghold of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) and helicopters were deployed to track down the attackers.
An Afghan government vehicle convoy was attacked by unidentified people in Sarkhoza, near the Orgun junction in Paktika province.  One vehicle was destroyed and others were damaged.  No injuries were reported.
Pablo Guerrero Gonzalez was killed by eight heavily armed men who identified themselves as members of the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC).  Guerrero was a 54-year-old farmhand that the AUC accused of helping Colombian guerrillas.  Investigators say the attack took place at night at the Cano Lindo Ranch in the Oro River area.  Six people have been killed by the AUC in the border area in the past two weeks.
A homemade concussion bomb exploded at a City Bank in Izmir Province, shattering windows but not causing any injuries.  This is one of three concussion bombs that detonated in Izmir on this day.Note:  It is unclear if this City Bank is the same as the American company, Citibank.
Five people were killed and eight injured when a group of National Liberation Front of Tripura (NLFT) insurgents attacked a wedding party.  The insurgents opened fire on the party and killed the leader of the Communist Party and supporters of the party.  No other explanation was provided for the attack.
The Earth Liberation Front (ELF) claimed responsibility for damaging over sixty SUV's in Santa Cruz, California.  The vandalized SUV's included about twenty private vehicles as well forty at the North Bay Ford and Lincoln Mercury car dealership.  Messages were spray-painted on the vehicles denouncing the war in Iraq.  Messages like No War, SUVs Suck and No blood for oil were found on the SUV's.  Damage is estimated at about $600 per vehicle.
A Qassem rocket was fired at Sederot.  No one was hurt.
Three anti-tank shells were fired at Neve Deqalim.  No one was hurt.
A leftwing extremist group is responsible for setting fire to a children's party bus that was parked in a McDonald's parking lot in Hamburg.  The fire spread quickly and material damage was caused.  Fliers that were found in the parking lot stated, solidarity in the resistance against imperialism and Zionism- the simultaneous nature of the struggles is our strength.  This is one of two arson attacks perpetrated on this night by this group.
Eight government officials were abducted by suspected National Liberation Front of Tripura (NLFT) members in the West Tripura district.  The officials were traveling on a road in the area and were stopped in Belbari Takarjala and abducted to an unknown destination.  SATP reports that the perpetrators may have shot and injured two others who were trying to escape the abduction.
A railway bridge connecting Mitrovice with Raska and Kraljevo was damaged by an explosive device planted by members of the Albanian National Army (ANA).  The ANA claimed responsibility for this, claiming that it was carried out in order to sever ties between ethnic Albanian territory and Belgrade.  The two people who were planting the bomb were killed by the explosion.
Unidentified gunmen opened fire on the bodyguards of Qandahar governor Gul Agha Sherzai in the Pakistani border town of Chaman, killing one and injuring two.  The guard killed immediately was variously the governor's nephew or cousin as well.  One of the wounded guards died of his injuries the following day, raising the number of dead to two.  The assailants had been following the guards and their vehicle along Bafra Road on a motorcycle.  They escaped after the attack.  Taleban and al-Qaeda remnants are suspected.
An explosive device detonated at a McDonald's fast food restaurant in Aksaray, in Istanbul Province, causing damage to the premises.  There were no reported injuries.  This blast occurred forty-five minutes after one at a Judge's Club in Tarabye and almost simultaneously with another at a McDonald's in the Sirkeci neighborhood of Istanbul.Note:  The Revolutionary People's Liberation Front (DHKC) claimed responsibility for this attack and two others (another on a McDonalds restaurant and one against a judge's club).  The group called the Turkish government a neo-colony of the U.S. and stated, that is why the governments in our country are collaborators with America.  Even in times when they have contradictions with America for various reasons, they serve the U.S.A.
Early in the morning a bomb exploded in the Cattle Breeders Association in the state of Tachira (Asogata) causing some property damage.  The President of Asogata, Genaro Mendez, indicated that pamphlets found at the site allegedly implicate groups that support the government.  However, authorities have yet to establish the identity of those responsible for the incident.  The fliers read, The land is for everyone.  Revolution is the only road to success.  This bombing is believed to be a part of a wave of bombings throughout Venezuela this year, the most recent being the explosion targeting the Caracas Teleport tower, site of the last Committee on Negotiation and Agreements.
An IDF detail found an explosive charge of a type that is detonated by string near the settlement of Morag in the southern part of the Gaza Strip.  They safely defused the 50 kg charge.
A Qassem rocket that failed to explode was found near the Qatif Bloc settlement of Neve Deqalim.  Border police sappers safely defused it.
Three Israelis were wounded when Palestinian gunmen opened fire on their car near the West Bank settlement of Shaqed.  The military wing of Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ), the al-Quds Brigades, claimed the attack.
Three Qassem missiles were fired at Sederot in southern Israel, causing damage but no casualties.  Over 50 Qassem rockets have hit the town since the beginning of 2003, double the number that landed in 2002.  There have been no serious injuries from the primitive rockets and little damage.  The military wing of Hamas, the al-Qassem Brigades, claimed the attack, citing revenge for IDF attacks in the Gaza Strip.
Seven people were taken by the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) after being stopped at an illegal roadblock.  The armed forces have vowed to hunt down those responsible for the kidnappings.  It is believed that this incident is an attempt to disrupt the Easter holiday weekend.
One person died and three were wounded when rebels dynamited a section of the trans-Andean oil pipeline near an Ecopetrol facility (the state-run oil company).  The bombing took place near Orito in the southern province of Putumayo which borders Ecuador.  The blast damaged a part of the pipeline that carries oil to the Pacific port of Tumaco.  Those injured in the explosion were taken to a hospital in Ecuador.
A small pipe bomb exploded about 30 meters from the UN building in Jakarta, leaving a foot-long hole in the pavement.  No one has claimed responsibility for the attack, and it is not clear whether the UN was the intended target of the blast.
Militants opened fire on a taxi in Sonarwani village in Kupwara district, killing the driver and wounding his passenger.
Unidentified gunmen entered the home of an alleged informer in Larau village in Pulwama district, dragged him from his home and later shot him dead.
An attacker that police called the Italian Unabomber is being blamed for an explosive attack that injured two young girls- one seriously.  In this attack, a booby-trapped marker that a 9-year old girl was playing with exploded in her hand.  The blast caused her to lose three fingers and possibly one of her eyes.  In the past, the Italian Unabomber has booby-trapped eggs, mayonnaise jars, tomato paste and is blamed for leaving explosives in public places like beaches and cemeteries.  Italian police have very little information about his motives.
A moving goods train was damaged when an explosion on the railway track near Howphow (Sivasagar district) was triggered by rebels from the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA).
Unidentified men threw a hand grenade into the compound of an unspecified international NGO in the eastern city of Jalalabad.  No one was injured and no damage was caused.
The Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC) claimed responsibility for seriously damaging a hotel belonging to the Ibis chain in Sagone with an explosive device.  In their claim of the attack the group states, We confirm that this action is not in any way aimed at a local promoter.  It means that we are prohibiting the construction of 17 of the Accor group's projects in Corsica, which no one is unaware of.  This is the third time this group has attacked this hotel.
Militants attacked the ancestral home of Jammu and Kashmir Minister of Finance Muzaffar Hussain Baig at Chandusa village in Baramulla district.  Security personnel repulsed the attack with seven guards sustaining injuries according to a radio station supportive of the militants.  The Minister was in Srinagar at the time of the attack.
Unidentified assailants launched rockets at several government buildings in Spin Boldak, killing two Afghan soldiers and injuring three others.
A militant attacked a group of National Conference (NC) activists returning from a rally to NC President Omar Abdullah in Surankote.  The militant lobbed a grenade at the group, wounding five, then shot one of the activists- a headman- killing him.
Unidentified gunmen shot dead a People's Democratic Party worker in Palhalan, Pattan.
Palestinians fired two mortar shells at a Qatif Bloc settlement in the Gaza Strip.  One of the shells failed to explode.  No one was injured.
Gunmen shot and killed the driver of a car belonging to a UN-affiliated local de-mining agency in Wardak Province on the Kabul-Qandahar road.  A passenger was also wounded in the attack.  The gunmen had reportedly been looking for foreign aid workers.
An explosive device, possibly a concussion bomb, detonated near the US Consulate on Ataturk Street in Adana Province.  There was no reported damage caused to the consulate.  This is one of four bomb attacks in the area on this night.
National Conference (NC) leader Sheikh Ghulam Ahmad Sadoora was injured in a grenade attack in the Ganderbal area of Srinagar.
A shooting attack targeting a settler's car near the West Bank settlement of Rimonim wounded one.
A bomb thrown at an oil storage facility lit two of five storage tanks on fire, causing significant damage.  It was also reported that several gas canister bombs were launched at other parts of the compound but did not explode.  Guerrilla groups are thought to be responsible for the attack.
An explosion occurred at a gymnasium being used as an evacuation center, in Cotabato City, wounding six evacuees. The perpetrators fired an M-79 grenade launcher which exploded on the roof of the guym. Police suspected that Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) was behind the attack.
The body of a photographer was recovered from the Tral area.  He had been kidnapped by gunmen the day before (5 May) from Tral.
A mortar shell was fired at the Qatif Bloc of settlements in the Gaza Strip.  No one was hurt.  The military wing of Hamas, the Izz-ad-din al-Qassem Brigades, claimed the attack.
Palestinians fired six Qassem rockets into Israel proper.  Two landed in Sederot, injuring two; three others landed in the vicinity of Sederot and Yad Morde Khay; and the sixth landed near the local kibbutz.  The military wing of Hamas- the al-Qassem Brigades- claimed the attack.
A bomb detonated in a passenger bus in the Pakistani city of Hyderabad, wounding eleven.  The bomb had been planted under a seat.  There have been over a dozen bomb blasts in Hyderabad in the last two years.
After an explosion in front of a public market killed nine and wounded forty-one people, authorities found and detonated an explosive device that was located about 50 meters from the city hall.
In a series of attacks on the Telugu Desam Party (TDP), the People's War Group (PWG) killed Dondapati Lakshmi Narayana, an activist of the ruling TDP, at Pulipadu of Gurazala mandal (Guntur district).  He had served as the village Sarpanch (headman).
An unexploded Qassem rocket was discovered near the settlement of Bedolah.  Bomb disposal experts safely detonated it.
A homemade bomb exploded in a public school in northern Sao Paulo.  Several classroom windows were shattered, but no one was injured.  It is unknown who was responsible for the blast.  No further information is provided.
Four simultaneous suicide bombings occurred against western targets in Riyadh, the capital of Saudi Arabia.  In total, the blasts killed thirty-four people, including the nine attackers, seven Saudis, ten Americans, three Filipinos, two Jordanians, and one each from Australia, Britain, Ireland, Lebanon, and Switzerland.  Many more were wounded in the attacks. At least forty Americans were in the hospital.  It is impossible to disaggregate the number killed and wounded in each attack, based on the reporting. Three of the blasts occurred at housing complexes housing westerners.  The fourth blast occurred at the Headquarters of the Saudi Maintenance Co, also known as Siyanco, a joint venture between Frank E Basil Inc (Greek engineering firm) and local Saudi partners. No one was injured in this portion of the attack.  Investigations suggested that the attackers were linked with Al-Qaeda and possibly had ties to Yemen and those individuals who bombed the USS Cole. Several individuals believed to have been involved were arrested and/or identified.
Shots were fired at an Israeli car between the Tapuah junction and Ariel.  No one was hurt.
A homemade remote-controlled explosive device was discovered and defused on the road connection Urus-Martan and Alkhan-Yurt.  The road is used by thousands of cars driving between the southwestern parts of Chechnya.  The device was made up of about five kilos of TNT and reinforced with nails.  This is one of two similar devices found on major highways on this day.
A mortar shell, fired the day before (13 May) was found in the hothouses of Ganey Tal settlement.
A series of explosions caused minor damage to 18 gas stations owned by the Anglo-Dutch firm Shell in Pakistan's southern port city of Karachi.  One customer, three pump attendants, and three security guards received light injuries.  Police believe the explosives were placed by men on motorcycles the night before when thousands of motorcyclists flooded city roads to celebrate the anniversary of the Prophet Muhammad's birth.  A previously unknown group calling itself the Muslim United Army claimed the attacks, calling them a small glimpse of the group's capabilities.  The statement urged the Pakistani government to change its pro-US policy or face major attacks.
Unidentified assailants entered a house belonging to an alleged informer in Uroo Ladoora in Baramulla district and shot the man dead.
This is one of five simultaneous attacks in which forty-three people were killed and more than one hundred wounded:  The attack took place at Casa de Espana, a Spanish restaurant popular among Western tourists and Moroccans alike.  The attack was the bloodiest of the five, killing twenty, with eight European tourists among them.  It is unclear whether the attack was the work of a local al-Qaeda cell, or a home-grown attack perpetrated by one of Morocco's smaller fundamentalist splinter groups.  Moroccan authorities believe al-Qaeda financed the attack with US$50,000.  However, the alleged liaison between al-Qaeda and the Moroccan cell died in custody shortly after being apprehended, further obscuring the relationship between al-Qaeda and the perpetrators of the attack.  Finally, the attackers were all Moroccans between the ages of 21 and 32, and for the most part residents of the same poor neighborhood.  They are loosely being described as part of a group known as Assirat al-Moustaqim, although details regarding their exact affiliation are still forthcoming.  On 4 April, police in France held thirteen people, after raiding their homes, in connection with this attack.  Police believe the Casablanca incidents may have been perpetrated by the same group that carried out the 11 March 2004, Madrin train bombing.  On 13 July 2005, an Italian court jailed two North Africans for being members of terrorist cells plotting attacks.  One of these suspects, Mohamed Rafik, is believed to have been involved in this incident as well.
A Qassem rocket was fired at Sederot and landed in an open field.  No one was hurt and no damage was caused.  Hamas' military wing, the al-Qassem Brigades, claimed the attack.
Unidentified militants shot dead an alleged informer from Kandi, Kupwara in his village.
Shortly after a suicide bombing at Jerusalem's French Hill junction that killed eight and wounded 21, a second bomber detonated when ordered to stop by Border Policemen at a checkpoint set up in response to the earlier attack.  The bomber was killed but no one else was injured in the explosion, near the entrance to Jerusalem's Dahit al-Barid neighborhood.
A Qassem rocket fired from the northern Gaza Strip landed near the Israeli town of Sederot.  No one was hurt and no damage was caused.
Unidentified militants beheaded five or six (varies according to accounts) members of a family at their home in Mehratop Chowkian in Rajouri district.  The owner of the house and head of the family was not present at the time of the attack.  Three of his sons, whose wives were among those killed, work for the Indian army and police.
A justice of the peace court was slightly damaged by a bomb attack in Zalla.  The blast started a small fire, which was put out by the police.  The explosive device was made up of camping gas cylinders and a bottle of flammable liquid.  This was one of three attacks on this evening in the town of Zalla.
Fatma Kaypinar, a member of the Revolutionary People's Liberation Party- Front (DHKP-C) was killed when a bomb, made of TNT, that she had on her body exploded in the toilet of the Crocodile Caf in Ankara.  Police believe that Kayapinar intended to carry out an attack in the area but detonated the device by accident in the caf when a police officer walked in and she panicked.  One other customer in the caf was injured in the blast.  Authorities had been warned in past months that the DHKP-C might launch suicide attacks in Turkey.
An alleged informer was shot dead by unidentified gunmen inside his house in Chogul, in Kupwara district.
Militants opened fire on an Intelligence Bureau (IB) vehicle at Shopian town in Pulwama district, killing two men with the IB, wounding one more and wounding a civilian.  Jamiat-ul-Mujahideen (JuM) claimed the attack.
An unidentified man blew himself up with a grenade when police attempted to approach him in Ingushetia Province.  The perpetrator was in a private car and offered armed resistance to the officers as they approached before detonating the grenade.  Authorities believe that the man might have been an intifada fighter and martyr who was fighting for the Chechen cause.
Unknown assailants threw a hand grenade at the office of an unnamed foreign soft drink company in the Malik Deen Serai area along the Bannu-Dera Ismail Khan road.  No one was hurt but damage was caused.
An anti-tank missile fired at a bus traveling from Netzarim settlement to Israel proper injured nine passengers.  Initial reports suggested the explosion could have been the result of a roadside bomb, but a communique from Hamas' military wing- the al-Qassem Brigades- claiming the attack implies a projectile instead.
Four students at the Belhadj Aissa Qur'anic school were killed by unknown assailants (in Khraiz hamlet) near Chlef, an area of frequent operations for the Armed Islamic Group (GIA) and the Salafist Group for Call and Combat (GSPC).  Another student was seriously wounded in the attack.
Unknown assailants threw two Molotov cocktails at a BBVA bank branch in Oiartzun.  The devices started a fire that caused damage to the cash dispenser.
The group Resistenza Corsa claimed responsibility for an attack on La Citadelle, a bar in Bastia that seriously damaged the premises.  The group also claimed responsibility for two other attempted attacks in the area that failed to ignite.  The group said that it carried out its actions, against drug trafficking and illegal immigration.
An explosive attack on a government building in Bern is being blamed on anti-globalization protestors.  The blast rocked the building which houses the federal mint and defense ministry offices.  There were no reported injuries.  In a fax to Swiss media, an anonymous group claimed responsibility for the explosive device and said that the attack was to draw attention to the 1 June G8 summit that will take place in Evian.
Multiple mortar shells were fired at a Qatif Bloc settlement.  No one was hurt.
The Cano-Limon Covenas oil pipeline was attacked, causing 7000 barrels of oil into the Cimitarra stream.  It is assumed that rebels carried out that attack in their ongoing effort to prevent multinational companies from stealing the natural resources of Colombia.  The spill has contaminated a local aqueduct, leaving 4700 families in Norte de Santander without water.  The 780 km pipeline has been attacked 972 times since its inception in 1985.
Muhammad Zayd, an officer in Arafat's Presidential Guard, was shot dead in southern Ramallah while inside his car.
The mayor of San Antonio, Belisario Tao Useche, died in the hospital 29 May 2003 after being shot five times by two attackers on the 28th.  Bystanders and bodyguards retaliated and captured one attacker, who is believed to be a member of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC).  A woman and child were also injured in the assassination.
A civilian was kidnapped and killed by militants in Hiltak in Darhal.
A car bomb in a main square in Sanguesa killed two police officers and wounded two other people.  The blast occurred when one of the officers turned on the ignition of the unmarked car that belonged to the officers.  The attack is being blamed on the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) and comes only a few days after local and regional elections banned parties that seem to be allied with ETA.Note:  On 15 July, police arrested two suspected members of ETA, Joseba Segurola and Ibai Aguinaga, that they believe were linked to this attack.
Gunmen killed a man in the Dhar forest area of Bhaderwah town.
Mortar shells were fired at the Qatif Bloc.  No one was hurt.
Police recovered the body of a man kidnapped the night before from Bhaderwah in Doda district.
A luxury home, being built in the Sterling Oaks development in Chico, California was partially damaged by an arson attack.  The Earth Liberation Front (ELF) claimed responsibility for the attack, which they say was started with a napalm incendiary device.  Damage was minimal because the first melted a pvc water pipe, bursting it and allowing water to extinguish the flames.  The group stated, in its communiqu, that it targeted this luxury home due to damage to the bioregion that occurs through development.  Authorities found the message Save Our Bio Region ELF spray-painted at the scene of the attack.
The Earth Liberation Front (ELF) claimed responsibility for setting fire to two nearly completed luxury homes in Macomb County, Michigan.  The fire destroyed the two homes and authorities found the letters ELF and an anti-sprawl message spray painted at the scene.  The group's website also claimed responsibility for the incident.
Adamsite, a poison used often to kill rats, was shipped in an envelope to an official building in Deinze.  No further information about the target is available.  Adamsite is a derivative of arsenic and is used, among other things, in rocket fuel.  The poison acts as an irritant and is only mildly potent.  The people who opened the letters suffered eye irritation and trouble breathing.  This was one of at least seven letters found to contain this substance in Belgium on this day.
An envelope, containing Adamsite, a poison used to kill rats, was delivered to the British Embassy in Brussels.  Adamsite is a derivative of arsenic and is used, among other things, in rocket fuel.  The poison acts as an irritant and is only mildly potent.  The people who opened the letters suffered eye irritation and trouble breathing.  This was one of at least seven letters found to contain this substance in Belgium on this day.
Police recovered the bodies of two Israelis found stabbed to death in woods near Moshave Even Sapir outside of Jerusalem.  The two had been beaten as well and police suspect nationalistic motives.  (Nothing on the scene suggested a criminal attack.)
Edwin Ariel Lopez, 28, a student at Francisco de Paula Santander University was found dead.  Lopez was dragged from his home on April 13 by suspected United Self Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) members who are believed to be carrying out a campaign to clean up the university by terrorizing the students and professors.  The body of another student, Gerson Gallardo Nino, 27, was also found.  Neither student has any reported tied to the guerillas.
Unidentified militants abducted and later shot dead four men from SeriGalla village.
Police recovered the body of a Aloochi Bagh resident near Srinagar's Kothi Bagh Bund.
An Israeli was killed by shots fired at the Hebron casbah.
Two explosive charges detonated in a flat that houses the regional director of the postal services and the former regional director of infrastructure, on the island of Corsica.  The charges exploded, causing only minor damage and no injuries.
Mayoral Candidate, Gabrial Catagena, was among 4 indigenous people killed in an attack suspected of being carried out by the AUC.  Catagena recently resigned as governor of Canamono and Lomaprieta in order to run as mayor of Riosucio.  He had been recently threatened by paramilitaries and accused of being a guerilla collaborator by officials of the mayor's office.  Four other people, reported to be body guards, were seriously injured in the attack.
In a series of attacks on political party members, Naxalites of the People's War Group (PWG) killed a local leader of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), India's right-wing majority party.  The Naxalites killed the party leader after he was returning home.  The attack is one in a series of attacks on political party leaders; a leader of the TDP was also killed by Naxalites this week.
Mortar shells were fired at a settlement in the northern part of the Gaza Strip.
Authorities found and defused a land mine, consisting of two mortar bombs and a pressure contact-maker, in the House of Culture in Starye Atagi, in the Groznensky district of Chechnya.  The blast was to take place during a cultural event.  Sappers removed the device and brought it out of the village to be defused.
Palestinians fired a Qassem rocket in the northern Gaza Strip.  The rocket landed in Israel but failed to explode.  No one was hurt.
An activist of the banned Pakistani sectarian group Sipah-I-Sihaba Pakistan, was shot deal along with his brother in New Karachi.  Saadat Ali, 29, and Sadaqat Ali were riding their motorcycle when they were intercepted by the assailants on another motorcycle in Karachi's sector 5-6.
People's War Group (PWG) killed a former Bhartiya Janata Party (BJP) leader in Karimnagar, the district where the PWG killed a member of the TDP two days prior. The Naxalites raided the house of the former BJP local president and then killed him.  The attack is one in a series of attacks on political groups by the PWG.
A Qassem rocket was fired at Netzarim settlement in the Gaza Strip.  No one was hurt.  The military wing of Hamas, the al-Qassem Brigades claimed the attack
In the second failed attack in Kabul in three days, a bomb hidden in a box, placed across from a high school was found and safely deactivated by security personnel.  The bomb had been fitted with a remote control.
A fragmentation bomb detonated in the basement of a building that houses Star Daily in Izmir Province.  Windows of the building were shattered but no one was injured in the blast.  Two members of the Marxist-Leninist Communist Party (MLKP) were arrested in connection with this attack.
Militants entered a house in Mangota-Marmat in Doda district, and shot dead the owner's wife.
No one was injured in an attack on the head of the investigation department of Konar province.  Mohammad Amin and his bodyguards were traveling in Norang district when a remote-controlled mine that was placed on his route, exploded.
The deputy head of Khost Province's Hajj and Endowment survived an attempt on his life when a remote-controlled bomb was detonated against his vehicle outside the town of Mazari.  No one was hurt.
Gunmen entered a house in Khiram village, near Bijbehara, that belongs to a People's Democratic Party (PDP) worker and shot dead the man's son.  Police believe the assailants had been looking for the father, who was not present at the time of the attack.
Unidentified gunmen killed a UN Red Crescent society worker in the Dara-e Nur area of Nangarhar Province.
A group of at least six militants entered Jameri village in the Mahore area of Udhampur district and set two homes belonging to Village Defense Committees (VDC) on fire.  The assailants then opened fire on the residents, killing one VDC member and the son of another.
Two villas belonging to a person living in Yvelines and a British housing company were seriously damaged on the southern bank of the Ajaccio bay.  An inscription bearing the letters 'FLNC' (Corsican National Liberation Front) was found out the scene.  The explosive charges, a mixture of nitrate fuel, went off outside the houses which were unoccupied at the time.
A Qassem missile was fired at Sederot.  There were no reported injuries.
Authorities in Kosovo safely detonated an explosive device that had been left in front of the Supreme Court building in Pristina.  The device had been reported by a passer-by who spotted it in front of the building.  Sappers were able to detonate the device with no material damage caused.
A woman was shot dead and her daughter injured in an attack by militants on their house in Samot village in the Budhal area of Rajouri district.
A security guard of Akhmad Kadyrov, the Chechen administration head, was killed by gunmen near a caf in Grozny.  The attackers shot the guard, stole his handgun and escaped the scene.
Police recovered a body from Hafkadi Zainapora Shopian.  The body had knife wounds on it.
Militants entered a house in Keygam in Kupwara district and opened fire on the inhabitants, injuring two.
Another Iraqi oil pipeline was sabotaged, this time thought to be a fuel line to Syria near the Iraqi-Syrian border.
A Qassem rocket landed at the Gevim junction near Sederot, but failed to explode.
A fuel pipeline near the Syrian border was sabotaged in a third attack on Iraq's energy infrastructure in 10 days.
A car bomb exploded at the Iraqi Police Academy in Mosul.  The specific number of casualties is unknown, however in three car bomb attacks in Mosul on this day, around sixty-five people were killed (it is impossible to disaggregate the specific numbers from each attack).  This attack, along with a series of others took place only one week before the scheduled handover of power from the US government to the Iraqi interim government.  A group affiliated with Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, the Tawhid and Jihad claimed responsibility for the coordinated attacks, on an Islamic website.  At the end of the day, over ninety people were killed and over 250 were injured.
An explosion outside the residence of Miranda state Governor Enrique Mendoza shattered windows and damaged nearby shops and offices.  Mendoza, a leading opponent of Hugo Chavez, was not home at the time of the incident.  A witness claimed that assailants hurled an explosive devise at a car parked near the governor's mansion. It is not clear who is responsible for the incident although it was reported that pamphlets from the Bolivarian Liberation Forces were found at the site.
A Qassem rocket fired at Sederot landed in the fields of a nearby kibbutz and failed to explode.  The al-Qassem Brigades, the military wing of Hamas, claimed responsibility for the attack.
Unidentified perpetrators fired rocket-propelled grenades at the Supreme Council of the Islamic Revolution in Iraq party, in Ba'qouba.  Three party members were killed and two others injured in the attack.  This incident was one in a series of attacks that took place all over the country less than a week before the scheduled handover of power from the US to a new Iraqi interim government.  Authorities suspect that Abu Musab al-Zarqawi's group, Tawhid and Jihad, may be responsible.
A number of unidentified insurgents attacked the blue-domed government building in Baqouba.  Guards at the premises managed to fire back at the attackers, killing four of them.  One of these attackers wore a suicide vest, to detonate himself once inside the building.  This incident was one in a series of attacks that took place all over the country less than a week before the scheduled handover of power from the US to a new Iraqi interim government.  Authorities suspect that Abu Musab al-Zarqawi's group, Tawhid and Jihad, may be responsible.
Members of the People's War Group (PWG) killed a sarpanch, or head member of a village and a member of the Telegu Desam Party by shooting him in his house.  Motivation behind the attack is not given, but the area has had serious rivalry conflicts between the PWG and the TDP in the past.
Shots were fired at the offices of a teachers' union in Hiroshima.  Three people were in the office at the time but no one was hurt.  A right-wing group called Kenkokugiyudan Betsudotai Kokuzokseibatsutai claimed the attack and threatened attacks on the union throughout Japan.
A man from Kharoosa Marwah in Doda district was shot dead by unidentified gunmen.
Suspected militants kidnapped and shot dead the head of Kanilwan hamlet near Bijbehara.  Ghulam Hassan had been a top-ranking worker of the ruling People's Democracy Party (PDP).
Three rockets hit the eastern Afghan city of Jalalabad, causing some damage but no casualties.  One landed on a house in front of the UN's Children's Fund (UNICEF) office in the city center but failed to explode; another damaged a house near a military base; and the third landed on cultivated land.  Officials blame remnants of the Taliban, al-Qaeda or Hezb-e Eslami for seeking to destabilize the government.
A suspected informer was shot dead by militants in his home in Bawan village near Handwara township.
Militants entered the house of a panch (village headman) in Batas Dhar village of Gool tehsil in Udhampur district, shot the headman dead and wounded his wife.
An alleged informer was shot and wounded in the central Kashmir district of Budgam.
An unidentified perpetrator set several gas canisters on fire under a vehicle that belonged to the Social Insurance Foundation in Thessaloniki, severely damaging the vehicle.  On 4 July a caller to the newspaper Elevtherotipia stated, yesterday there was an arson attack against a state car at Khalkidhiki Street in Thessaloniki.  The prisons burn bodies and souls but our fierce hearts will stay alive.  Freedom to the seven imprisoned of 21 June in Thessaloniki.  So long.
The Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) kidnapped five members of the Hands for Colombia Foundation, including Swiss citizen Florent Arnold Benedetti, the director of the NGO.  The following day a group of nearly 2000 Paez Indians confronted the FARC about the kiddnapping and sucessfully negotiated the release of the hostages. The motive for the kidnapping is not known.
Unidentified gunmen killed a man from Barshala in Doda district.
A female suicide bomber (one of two) blew herself up at a rock festival just outside of Moscow. The explosion occurred near the concert entrance. A woman detonated an explosive belt when police tried to stop her from entering. She was killed and several others injured, although the bomb did not explode properly. Both bombs had been stuffed with screws and nails, in order to cause the maximum damage. Chechen passports were found on one of the women, but no one formally claimed responsibility for the attack. One of the women has been identified as Zulikhan Suleymanovna Elikhadzhiyeva. At least fifty people were injured and seventeen killed in addition to the two women in the attack.As of July 9, investigators were investigating an SIM card from a destroyed mobile phone believed to belong to one of the suicide bombers. They believe the explosives may have been detonated remotely. It is believed that the perpetrators of this act are connected to those who seized the Dubrovka theater and manufactured the explosion of at McDonalds in the southwest of Moscow.On August 19, 2003, a man known as Alikhadzhiyev was detained on suspicion that he was the organizer behind the two blasts at the Tushino airfield.On October 10, several additional suspects in the bombings in Moscow on July 5 and 9 were detained in Ingushetia. Zelimkhan Saayev, who was suspected of being a key organizer of the attacks was killed during the operation to arrest the suspects. [Moscow Agentstvo Voyennykh Novostey]
A low intensity bomb exploded at 1:00 am near a local army garrison.  It is believed the bomb was an attempt to sabotage the 5th of July independence celebration to take place later in the day.  Initial investigations indicate that the bomb was thrown off of a bridge and exploded in the air.  It is unknown who is responsible for the blast and whether they were in a car or on foot.
The Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) claimed responsibility for planting two explosive devices at the Azkar haulage company in Bedia.  The caller gave authorities a half hour's notice of where the devices were planted but they detonated nonetheless, destroying three lories and causing considerably damage to the industrial estate.
A group of unknown bandits entered the home of  Khadlid Saidualayev, the head of the administration in the Chechen village of Gordali, and shot him dead.
Militants abducted and shot dead two former militants in Kakapora in Pulwama district.
The military wing of al-Fatah, al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades, claimed responsibility for opening fire on setlers near the seperation fence in northern Qalqilyah. The alleged leader of the attack was Mazin Abu-al-Wafa.
The official car of Ali Cafer Akyuz, the governor of Tunceli, was fired upon by unknown gunmen as it traveled from Pulumur to Tunceli.  Two members of his security force were killed and another was injured in the attack.  Akyuz blamed the Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK)/Kurdistan Democratic Congress (KADEK) for the attempted murder.  One suspected assailant was arrested on 11 July in connection with this shooting.  Police found three clips and two hand grenades in his possession when they captured him.
Four young men vacationing in La Vega were killed by Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) rebels.  The men were camping and the Arturo Ruiz mobile column of the FARC mistook them for paramilitaries.
A petrol bomb was thrown at a home on Corban Street in Lurgan by an unknown hooded individual.  The device failed to explode and no damage was caused.
Arauca Department Registrar Alejandro Plazas was shot and killed outside the registrar's office.  Although it is unknown who carried out the attack local police have not ruled out the possibility that is was an illegal armed groups operating near by.
A five kg bomb was detected and defused in northern Tehran's Mohseni Square.
An explosive device, consisting of a metal box with a small quantity of dynamite, a detonator and a wristwatch, was found outside the offices of American insurance company, Alico, in Athens.  An anonymous caller warned police of the device and they were able to safely defuse the bomb.Note:  On 26 July, a new group calling themselves the 'Popular Revolutionary Action' claimed responsibility for this attack.  In their five-page communiqu, which bore the picture of a red star similar to one used by the group November 17, the group referred to the collapse of democracy in Greece and to the fascism of Greek society.
A body was recovered from Batola village in Doda district.
An explosive device went off inside the Belgrade Palace of Justice. The device was planted by the wall of the mechanical shop on the premises of the Palace of Justice. Several windows were shattered on the surrounding buildings. There were no injuries reported. Serbian authorities report that the attack was perpetrated by organized criminals.
An explosive charge detonated at a drinks warehouse, owned by the Lantieri company, in Bonifacio, on the island of Corsica.  The blast, which was the third on the island on this day, Bastille Day, caused extensive damage to the warehouse.Note:  On 18 July, the Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC) claimed responsibility for eighteen attacks that took place on the island.  None of the attacks were referred to specifically so it is unclear if this is one of them.  In their claim of responsibility, the group called an end to their cease-fire stating, the cease-fire in our military actions ended on 11 July 2003.  11 July was the day eight nationalists accused of the murder of Corsican Prefect Claude Erignac were give prison sentences.
Unidentified perpetrators, who were riding on a motorbike, threw homemade explosive devices through the window of a shop in Athens that repairs police vehicles.  The devices caused a fire which destroyed seven motorbikes in the shop that belonged to the Traffic Police and Emergency Police and six motorbikes that belonged to private owners.Note:  A man called into a local newspaper to claim responsibility for this attack on behalf of a group calling itself the Anarchist Attack Teams
There was another blast outside a police station in Baghdad suburb, visited by US solidiers, killing at least one policeman.  Police have been a steady target for insurgents in Iraq.
Marco Tulio Diaz, the president of the Colombian Petroleum Enterprise Pensioners' Association, was killed while having breakfast at his mothers home in Cucuta.  Diaz was also the former president of the Worker's Trade Union, USO, in Tibu.  He is the latest victim of a group targeting unionists.  His brother was also  injured in the attack. The assailant fled the scene on a motorcycle.
Suspected loyalists of Saddam Hussayn assassinated the US-backed mayor of Haditha and one of his sons. Muhammad Nayel al-Jughaify was shot as he was driving home from his office and his car caught on fire in the attack. The mayor was accused of having been cooperating with US forces.
Twelve people were injured when a bomb exploded in a government hospital in Hyderabad in southern Pakistan.  The device had been wrapped in a bag and left under a bench, it weighed 100 grams and was fitted with a timer.
The headquarters of the Iranian opposition Mujahadin-e Khalq Organization (MKO) in Baghdad came under fire by unidentified assailants. Eyewitnesses said that at least 2 of the members were wounded. They were evacuated to a nearby US military hospital.
A Molotov cocktail was thrown at the Miranda municipality's mayor's office in Coro.  At around midnight the explosive was thrown out of a moving car.  It was also reported that several rounds of live automatic rifle ammunition were also found at the scene. It was indicated that this bombing could be connected with similar attacks on the homes of 2 labor union leaders on July 15th as well as the murder of two people on June 6th.
A mine, laid on the Kabul-Logar main road, was discovered and defused.  A remote-control, battery and motorcycle were also found at the scene.
The second bomb attack in three days was carried out in Lome against French targets.  This time an explosive device was detonated near a stage in a French cultural center, which had hosted a well-attended concert earlier in the night. No group claimed responsibility for the attack which caused no injury and limited damage. The French foreign ministry condemned the incident.
The military wing of al-Fatah, al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades, kidnapped Janin Governor Haydar Irshayd in the crowded location of Janin Square in broad daylight. They stated that Irshayd was kidnapped in retaliation for the intensive security coordination he has recently maintained with Israel.
Gunmen shot dead a man from Khour D H Pora.
An explosive device destroyed the holiday villa of a resident of mainland France in Prunelli di Fiumorbo, on the island of Corsica.  This incident comes late on the same day that an explosive device detonated in Nice, injuring sixteen people.  The attack in Nice, as well as another on the island of Corsica, were both claimed by the Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC).
A series of explosions erupted in Kosmet following the conviction of four former members of the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) last week. The attacks appeared to have been aimed at the judiciary and police headquarters of the city.  The second explosion was caused by a hand grenade thrown at a police station. Although a car was damaged, no one was hurt.
Jesus Maria Olaya, president of the Community Action Board, was murdered by Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) rebels.  Olaya, along with local teacher Maria del Socorro Nunez Victoria, were apparently accused of collaborating with the Army before being killed. (see Incident ID 9359) The FARC have launched a campaign of setting up illegal road blocks in the area.
An explosive device detonated at the Hotel Nadal in Benidorm, on the Mediterranean coast of Spain, injuring four police officers and one civilian.  This was one of two explosive attacks on hotels in the area, a second detonated in Alicante, injuring four civilians.  The two blasts came after a warning from the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) that devices had been planted in resorts on the Costa Blanca.  ETA typically targets the tourism sector and large multi-national companies operating in the country.Note:  Police have identified Juan Jose Troitino Ciria, an ETA member, as the perpetrator in these two hotel bombings.  According to reports, Ciria arrived at the hotel, rented a room and left the bomb, inside a suitcase in his room with a timer set to detonate at 12:10 pm.
A Red Cross aid worker was shot dead and his Iraqi driver wounded when their car marked with the Red Cross emblem came under fire near Hila, south of Baghdad.  It was the second attack on international aid workers in the area in less than three days.
A man, who was shot in the leg by a group of men, blames the attack on factions of the Irish Republican Army (IRA).  The man claims that he was attacked because of his political views and that this was not a punishment shooting, as most of this nature are.  The victim was injured in the thigh in the incident but also claims that the perpetrators held a gun to his head and intended to kill him but the gun jammed.
An explosive device, consisting of one kilogram of explosives, detonated outside a courthouse in Estella, injuring one person and damaging the door and faade of the building.  Shortly before the blast, authorities received a warning from the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) about the location of the bomb.  This incident comes a few days after two ETA bombs injured thirteen people at two hotel blasts on the eastern coast of Spain and proves that the organization, which had lost many of its leaders to arrests, has regrouped in recent months.
Unidentified assailants abducted a suspected informer from Danipora Salia in Islamabad district, and beheaded him.  A note was left on the corpse warning informers of the consequences of their actions.
Three rockets were fired at government buildings in Tarin Kot- the capital of Afghanistan's Uruzgan Province.  No one was injured and no damage caused.  Officials blame Taliban remnants and their al-Qaeda allies.
An explosive device detonated in an office of Electricite de France, a state-run energy company, in Furiani, on the island of Corsica.  The blast damaged the premises and several nearby vehicles and shops but caused no injuries.  The attack, which is the work of suspected separatists, took place in the middle of the day.  There has been an upswing in violence on the island since French authorities arrested one of Corsica's most well-known separatist leaders earlier in the month.
In the West Bank village of Jilaboun, east of Jenin, Israeli soldiers exposed a large, trip-wired bomb. The military also found three pipe bombs in the vicinity.
Leonel Gutierrez, head of the Office of the Prosecutor General Judicial Unit of Florencia was shot and killed by three unidentified men.  The motive for the attack is unknown.
A member of the Qandahar Council was assassinated.  He had been an ideological opponent of the Taliban.
A car belonging to Dominique Ferriere, the head of the High Court in Ajaccio, on the island of Corsica, was damaged in an explosive attack.  The blast started a fire to the car, which was parked in the Saint-Jean district of the city, in a lock-up.  There were no claims of responsibility left at the scene.  The Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC)- Union of Combatants claimed responsibility for this attack on 28 August.
An explosive device detonated in front of the Telsim Regional Directorate in the Kadikoy area of Istanbul Province.  The blast shattered the windows of the building but didn't cause any injuries.
An explosive device detonated at a restaurant in Corte, on the island of Corsica, causing slight damage to the premises.  This was one of three explosive attacks on the island on this night.
One person was killed and eleven injured when unidentified men fired rockets at an Oil and Gas Development Corporation camp.  It was unclear who was responsible for the attack, but a faxed message to the Lahore Daily Times, said that eight mortar shells were fired at the camp.
A large car bomb exploded at the Jordanian Embassy in Baghdad, killing nineteen and injuring over fifty others.  The blast also damaged the outside faade of the building.  As a result of the attack, Jordanian embassy staff were moved to the city of Fallujah to continue business.  No group ever claimed responsibility for the attack, though authorities speculate it could be the work of the group Ansar al-Islam
An explosive device caused serious damage to the second home of a former member of the French gendarme that was being rented to a resident of mainland France.  Inscriptions bearing the initials FLNC (Corsican National Liberation Front) were found at the scene of the blast.
Ivan Rincon, Aguadas Mayor, was shot and killed at 01:30 in the morning while attending  a public gathering.  A local police commander said that two henchmen who were hiding among the people at the event shot him and his security detail. One of his bodyguards was seriously injured.  Rincon had repeatedly received death threats from the FARC.  13 Mayors and 63 municipality workers were killed last year.
A suicide car bomb detonated in front of a Marriott hotel in Jakarta, killing thirteen people and injuring approximately 149 others.  The adjoining office block and several cars caught on fire from the explosion.  The attack came two days before a verdict came down in the trial of the Bali nightclub bombers.  Al Qaeda claimed responsibility for the attack and the perpetrators are known to have trained in Qaeda training camps in Afghanistan and Pakistan.  In May 2004, Muhammad Rais was found guilty of violating anti-terrorism laws in connection with this attack.  Rais is accused of transporting explosives from various towns to Jakarta, where they were used in the bomb.  Rais will serve seven years in prison for his role in the attack.
Two police officers were killed and another injured when unknown assailants hurled grenades and opened fire at a police checkpoint in Nusaybin, in Mardin province, near the Iraq border.  The Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) is active in the area but it is unclear if they carried out this attack.
Unidentified terrorists fired two grenades at an unknown target, causing injuries to two people.  The state irrigation minister was standing nearby, but escaped injury.  It is unclear whether he was the target of the attack.
An explosive device detonated at the premises of the Telediffusion de France (TDF), a private French radio and television broadcaster, in Borgo.  The blast caused extensive damage to the premises but there were no reported injuries.
A cash machine in Markina, was totally destroyed when unknown perpetrators threw several Molotov cocktails at it.  No further information is available.
Pedro Vicente Munoz Guarin, 46, a candidate for Los Patios Municipality council for the Social Advancement Alternative Party (ALAS), and a past President of El Llanito Neighborhood Community Action Board, was shot and killed at his home.  The unknown attacker fled with an accomplice on a motorcycle.
Gerardo Alberto Zapata Correa, mayoral candidate for the Equipo Colombia party in Toledo,  was kidnapped by the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) as he returned from a campaign event in Dioqui.
The home of a Catholic family, that was under construction, was completely destroyed by a fire in Desertmartin.  This is the fifth time the homeowner's home has been attacked but this was the worst damage caused yet.  Authorities are calling the attack sectarian and blame it on loyalist paramilitaries.
Two Afghan Red Crescent workers were killed and three others wounded in an attack outside Kabul.  A group of five unidentified men opened fire on the Red Crescent vehicle.  The Red Crescent director blamed the Taliban and al-Qaeda, but no one claimed responsibility for the attack.
A high-powered explosive charge detonated, blowing the floor out of a building which houses offices of the Departmental Directorate for Infrastructure and of the Regional Directorate for Industry and Research in Ajaccio.  The blast also shattered the windows of several nearby buildings and caused five people to suffer slight shock.
The Kerala police discovered and diffused two crude bombs inside a Kerala State Transport Corporation bus.  It is unknown whether the bus was the target, or if the devices were intended for another location.
Two Muslim youths were injured by suspected Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) members, who stabbed the individuals.  No further information is available.
Two Muslim youths were allegedly killed by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) rebels, leading to violent protests in Sennayagampura.  A day earlier, two other Muslim youths were injured by LTTE who stabbed the inidividuals.
Unidentified gunmen shot dead two Shias in suspected sectarian attacks, which sparked a subsequent violent demonstration.
An office of the EDF, the French national power company, was targeted by an explosive attack in Bastia, on the island of Corsica.  One police officer, who arrived at the scene right before the blast, was injured.  Serious damage was caused to the premises.
Unknown gunmen opened fire with machine guns at the Vico gendarmerie in the Corse-du-Sud department in southern Corsica.  Three bullet holes were lodged in the walls but no one was injured in the attack.  Corsican separatists typically target symbols of French power on the island.
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) rebels fired rifles at President Uribe's helicopter as he was arriving in Granada.  Although there is some dispute about whether the shots heard were actually directed at the president, a local police general stated that the helicopters were attacked and the president was in some danger.  After hearing the shots the presidential convoy responded by exchanged fire with the rebels. The president eventually landed in Granada and his visit went as planned.  FARC have attempted to assassinate Uribe several times over the past 2 years.
Two Indian railway workers were injured when a bomb on a track exploded near Muzaffarnagar city.  Trains were suspended when officials found three more bombs at the site.
The vacation home of a mainland France resident was totally destroyed by an explosive attack in Sainte-Lucie-de-Porto-Vecchio, on the island of Corsica.  This was one of two explosive attacks on this evening on the island.
Four out of seven pamphlet bombs exploded in different parts of Quito.  The bombs were wrapped as gifts and left at seven different locations.  The four that exploded were located near the US embassy, the Abdon Calderon School, El Recreo commercial center, and the Gamavision offices.  The three which did not go off were placed near the San Francisco Plaza, Teleamaxones offices and the Cinemark movie theatre.  The People Fighters Group (GCP) have claimed responsibility for the bombs which contained messages which called for an armed uprising, seizing power, and statements condemning Colombian President Alvaro Uribe and Plan Colombia.  No one was hurt and no material damage occurred.
A bomb exploded inside a temple near the disputed Ram Janmabhoomi-Babri Masjid mosque, damaging its roof and side walls, but causing no casualties or injuries.
Loyalists are being blamed for smashing the window of a Catholic home in north Belfast and damaging potted plants.  The homeowner claims that she has been attacked a number of times over the past year and believes she is being targeted because she is Catholic.
A bomb-like object was found near a building belonging to the Kukuoka city office of the General Association of Korean Residents in Japan (Ch'ongnyon).  A caller identifying himself as a member of a group called Kenkoku Giyugun Chosen Seibatsutai (Voluntary Army Unit for Suppressing Koreans) claimed responsibility for the attack, the latest in a string against Korean-related sites.
Three blasts occurred almost at the same time in Krasnodar territory killing four  and injuring at least twenty people. All three explosive devises were similar, homemade, in aluminum cans, and equivalent to 200kg of explosives.The first occurred at a caf in Rus, killing 2 and wounding six.The three blasts were investigated as a single incident because of their synchronicity. Investigators suspected that their was a Chechen involvement in the attacks. On August 27, Interfax reported that police in Krasnodar had detained a resident resembling the sketch of the suspect.On September 9, ITAR-TASS reported that police had detained five suspects on suspicion of their involvement in the blasts.On October 2, ITAR-TASS reported that two of the central participants in the attack had been arrested.
Unknown extremists planted a remote-controlled bomb on a railway in Sibsagar, Assam, but only a portion of the track was damaged.  The bomb could have caused a lot more damage, as three passenger trains running between Calcutta and Dibrugarh were supposed to cross the area within hours.
A leader of Dhaka City Awami League, an opposition party, was gunned down by unidentified assailants just 35 hours after the killing of another opposition leader, Manjurul Imam.  Imam's death was claimed by leftist rebels the Purbo Banglar Communist Party.
A federal trooper was seriously injured after a blast in Srinigar's Batmaloo district.  The blast was caused by a grenade that was thrown by unknown attackers.  The attack takes place soon after Indian Prime Minister Vajpayee arrived in the city for a country.
Several shots were fired at the front faade of the law courts in the town of Bastia, on the island of Corsica.  There were no reported injuries.  The attack comes amidst an increase of separatist violence all over the island and a few days before French Justice Minister Dominique Perben is set to visit the island.  The Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC)- Union of Combatants claimed responsibility for this attack on 30 August.
Two gas canisters were lit on fire outside the ATM of the Emporiki Bank on Mesogion Avenue in Kholargos.  The fire destroyed the entrance of the bank the ATM.  A group calling itself the Anarchist Group claimed responsibility in order to demonstrate solidarity with those arrested in Thessaloniki.
126 people were killed and 300 injured in a car bomb attack outside a mosque in Najaf just after prayers. Included in the fatalities was Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq (SCIRI) leader Ayatollah Mohammed Baqr al-Hakim.  His nephew, top Shii cleric Ayatollah Mohammed Saeed al-Hakim survived a bomb attack at his office five days ago.  Authorities have arrested four non-Iraqi Arabs that confessed to the bombing.  On 13 July 2004, authorities arrested a Libyan man with links to al-Qaeda, who confessed to playing a role in this attack.  The man, Haydar Shinnawi, was arrested along with other members of al-Qaeda in Najaf.  Sami Muhammad Ali Said Jaaf, a lieutenant of Abu Musab Zarqawi, was taken into custody in mid-January 2005.  Jaaf admitted to being involved in over thirty-two bombings in Iraq, including this one.
Maoist guerillas shot and injured former state minister Devendra Raj Kandel in Kusunti.  No further information is provided.
Iz-al-din al-Qassam Brigades, the armed wing of Hamas, claimed responsibility for woundng a settler near the settlement of Rafayeh Yam in southern Gaza.
Federal forces prevented an act of terrorism against school children and their families in Groznyy. Chechen rebels allegedly planned to attack a festive meeting in one of the schools on 'Knowledge Day', devoted to kicking off the beginning of a new school year. They had intended to use a hand assault grenade, which is usually used to hit targets and personnel in a fifty meter radius. However, one of the rebels voluntarily surrendered to authorities and revealed the nature of the plot. The assault weapon was later found. Authorities say it was imported specifically for the attack.
A car belonging to a gendarmerie in Ghisonaccia, in eastern Corsica, was blown up by unknown perpetrators.  Extensive damage was caused to the vehicle but no one was hurt, as the drivers of the vehicle were in a restaurant at the time of the blast.
Unidentified people attacked the Jalalabad judicial department with two grenades.  The department was not damaged but a man who was going to mosque to pray was wounded.  This attack came two days after a similar attack on the Indian consulate in Jalalabad.
Two bombs exploded on a suburban train in Stavropol territory. The explosive devices are thought to have been remote-controlled and were placed under the tracks, five meters apart. They exploded with a force of five kg of TNT. The third car of the train was directly hit by the explosion.  Five people were killed and at least 91 injured. The blast coincides with a visit by President Putin to the southern city of Rostov for a meeting of the country's State council and with the first day of campaigning in the upcoming Parliamentary elections.  According to investigators, the explosive/triggering device used was a new one, which had never before been used in a terrorist attack. Some sources reported that the Wahhabites were suspected of being behind the attacks. Although immediately following the attack one suspect was arrested, it turned out that he was merely and innocent passenger.  On February 3 2004, investigators announced that the perpetrator of this attack, a Chechen resident, had been arrested and the organizer had been identified and declared wanted.On June 29, ITAR-TASS reported an additional  suspect, Ibragim Israpilov was found guilty of participating in the attack. He delivered explosives to the person who detonated the bomb. Additional explosives were found in Israpilov's car at the time of the explosion. He was sentenced to 20 years in prison.
A civilian affiliated with the US-contracted Halliburton was shot and killed in Baghdad while driving in a vehicle being escorted by military personnel. This is the second person associated with the firm to die in an attack in a month.
A car bomb exploded in front of the headquarters of conservative gubernatorial candidate Gerardo Canas. One police officer and one civilian were injured in the blast and significant physical damage was done to the property. It is unknown who carried out the attack or what the motive was.
A small grocery store in Borgo, south of Bastia on the island of Corsica, was damaged by an explosive device.  No one has claimed responsibility for the attack.
A suicide bombing, in form similar to the Tushino airfield attacks earlier this summer was averted when police disarmed the female bomber who was wearing a shahid belt. The attack was planned to take place on Tverskaya Street in Moscow during the celebration of City Day.
Alleged Maoists murdered journalist and teacher Gyanendra Khadk- a reporter for Nepal's state-run news agency- by slitting his throat.  The motive for the murder is unknown.
Two or three Molotov cocktails were thrown at the home of Gonzalo Quiroga, a Popular Party (PP) senator for Guipuzcoa, in San Sebastian.  The blasts damaged the front wall and balcony of the home but didn't injure anyone.  Quiroga himself was able to extinguish the ensuing fire.
Suspected Taliban fighters have shot dead four Afghans working for a Danish aid organization, the Danish Committee for Aid to Afghan Refugees.  The aid workers were killed after Taliban members stopped their vehicle, tied them up, and shot them.  A fifth aid worker was wounded in the attack and gave authorities details of what happened.  He said it was likely an attack by the Taliban because this fits into a pattern that we have seen lately, after the Taliban have stepped up attacks against aid workers.  The wounded aid worker also said that the assailants told him that they had told Afghans not to work with foreigners.
A series of bomb attacks were carried out by Maoists against a number of government offices and businesses, including at the Transport Management Office in Ekantakuna.  There were no figures on how many were injured in this attack.
Two yachts, belonging to residents of mainland France, were blown up by unknown suspects in Saint Florent.  The yachts had been moored in the mouth of the Aliso river when they were attacked.  There has been no claim of responsibility.
Police in Estonia are investigated an attempted terrorist incident in Laanemaa. Nails were strewn across train tracks in front of the advancing Eurotrain being used in the pro-Europe campaign supporting Estonia's entrance into the EU. The referendum on this issue is scheduled for Sept. 14. More than 300 people were on board the train. Although the train hit some of the nails, it was not derailed. One of the train drivers was then able to clear the track of nails and other obstacles. The attack was being viewed as an incident intended as an anti-EU statement.
No one was injured in a bomb blast set off by Maoists at the Information Department in Kathmandu.  The blast caused minor damage.
The local press is reporting that the murder of a Jewish Moroccan national, Albert Ribibo, was perpetrated by Salafia Jihadia, a radical Islamic group. Morocco has a relatively large Jewish community, though recently they have become targets of attacks as was the case in the May Casablanca suicide bombings where two of the targets were Jewish landmarks and a third was a Jewish-owned restaurant.
The personal car of a fire fighter was destroyed by an explosive attack in the town of Afa, on the island of Corsica.  The vehicle was empty at the time of the attack and no one was injured.  This incident comes amid an increase of separatist violence on the island.
Suspected Maoists exploded a powerful bomb inside a municipality office on the outskirts of Kathmandu causing considerable damage to the building.
Miguel Enrique Chamorro, a city counselor in Ovejas, was found dead on the outskirts of town.  Ovejas was recently inundated with flyers threatening candidates for the October 26 elections.  It is suspected that flyers were connected with his death.
A bomb exploded outside the political headquarters of Carlos Holguin Molina, a gubernatorial candidate.  The bomb was made out of180g or black powder, and caused minimal property damage. One guard was in the building at the time of the explosion, but he was uninjured.  This is the second campaign headquarters bombed in Medellin in September (see Incident ID 9954).
A truck filled with explosives blew up outside a government security building in Ingushetia's capital, Magas. Four people were killed and at least 40 injured. The building was severely damaged in the incident. No one had yet claimed responsibility, but Chechen  rebels were suspected. Investigators reported that 2 people were inside the truck at the time of explosion, making it a suicide attack. The truck was licensed to residents of Groznyy.The attack comes in the weeks preceding the October 5 elections in Chechnya. Separatist groups have vowed to step up their attacks in this period.On September 23, Amir Aasadullakh, commander of the Ingush unit of the Chechen suicide brigade said that a Nogay couple were driving the vehicle and that the attack was planned jointly with the Stavropol unit of the suicide brigade Riyadus Salikhin. The interview was reported on the Kavkaz-Tsentr New Agency Website.
Four missiles were fired near Jalalabad city airport, but killed no one.  Local authorities blame the Taliban for the attacks.
Many people were injured when unknown gunmen struck a convoy of UN aid workers and journalists in the Eastern Afghan province of Paktia.  Two UN vehicles were completely destroyed and three partly damaged in the attack.  UN teams reportedly stopped all their activities in the region after the attack.
Alfonso Lopez, the General Secretary for the Colombian National Communist Party in Tibacuy, was killed by five gunmen.  The men broke into his house, threatened his family, and executed him on the patio. Lopez has received threats in the past and some believe he should have received more government protection.
Shots were fired by unknown gunmen at a gendarmerie in Propriano, in Corse-du-Sud department, on the island of Corsica.  The bullets hit the shutters and walls of the building but narrowly avoided any officers.  Nicolas Sarkozy, the French Interior Minister stated, It is a fresh example of the insane nature of a tiny minority.  I am optimistic that we will end up by catching them and this shows that on the island there are people who are prepared to do absolutely anything.  It thus demonstrates that the policy which we have to carry out is still one of firmness.
Five petrol bombs were thrown at the home of a Catholic family in Newtownabbey.  The family, including a two-week old baby and a four-year old child, were uninjured in the attack, which authorities are calling sectarian.  The devices damaged windows on the property.
A bomb blast occurred in the center of the Rajouri town in Jammu.  The explosive material used was kept in a video cassette player which exploded and killed two people and injured ten others.  No terrorist group claimed responsibility for the incident.
The Earth Liberation Front (ELF) claimed responsibility for planting plastic bottles containing flammable liquid at the Ice Mountain Spring Water Company in Martiny, Michigan.  The devices were intended to start a fire at the premises but were discovered by maintenance workers before they were set ablaze.  In a written statement, the ELF stated, we will no longer stand idly be while corporations profit at the expense of all others.  To this end, we have taken action against one of the pumping stations that Perrier uses to steal water.
At least 3 persons were killed and 20 others wounded in a bombing attack that ripped through a cinema showing pornogrpahic films in Mosul. The cinema owner stated that he had received warnings from an unknown group to stop showing porn films but ignored them.
Afghan authorities and aid agencies reported the death of an Afghan aid worker who was attacked by unidentified armed individuals.  His driver sustained injuries.  A spokesman for the UN said he did not know who was behind the attack.
The Taliban claimed to have killed a district administrator in Kandahar along with eight of his men by shooting them and setting their car on fire, after taking control of the road which they were driving on.  A Taliban spokesman said all of them were shot for collaborating with the US military and Hamid Karzai's puppet regime.
The Ethiopian government suspects the OLF in an attack on a train traveling from Djibouti to Dire Dawa, which killed two passengers and injured nine others.  The bomb detonated inside the train, reportedly from a seat in the second class compartment.  The OLF denied any involvement in the incident, however, they have targeted the same train route in the past.
At least twelve people were injured when a bomb ripped through a passenger van in Karachi.  It was unclear who was behind the explosion, but it was believed by Pakistani authorities to be an act of terrorism.  The blast follows a series of arrests by Pakistani security agencies of Malaysian and Indonesian students from five Islamic religious schools in Karachi last week and arrests of three Islamic militants belonging to Lashkar-e-Jhangvi.
A 5 kg bomb placed on a motorcycle and detonated by remote control killed 12 and injured 56.  The explosion took place at 3:00 am in a crowded area know for bars and nightclubs.  Several young children and 2 police officers were among the victims.  The FARC is being blamed for the attack.
Two petrol bombs were thrown at the wall that surrounds the Protestant Fountain Estate in the center of Londonderry.  This is one of three petrol bomb attacks that took place in Londonderry on this evening.
A number of homemade explosive devices, made up of small propane canisters, detonated at the entrance to the building which is home to George Voulgarakis, a member of parliament for the New Democracy party in Athens.  The devices were placed underneath three cars and a motorcycle which belonged to Voulgarkis.  Voulgarakis' wife and children were home at the time of the attack and had to be rescued from the roof of the building.  This is one of five explosive attacks that took place on this evening around Athens.  Authorities believe the incidents were perpetrated to express solidarity with the defendants in the November 17 terrorism trial.  A new group, calling itself the Labor Association for Social Rebellion-Post Midnight Slalom claimed responsibility for all five of these explosive attacks.  In their written statement, the group states, Without those absent, nothing is present.  Without those who have fled, nothing is stable.  Without those forgotten, nothing is certain.  Oh democratic voter, will you start again diving into the ballots of complicity?  The group then called for the release of prisoners held in connection with incidents that took place in Thessaloniki.  They also condemned the upcoming Olympic games.
A firebomb detonated outside the apartment building of George Veltsos, a university professor and close friend of the Greek Prime Minister in the Kolonaki neighborhood, in Athens.  The blast caused only minor damage and no reported injuries.  This is one of five explosive attacks that took place in Athens on this evening.  Authorities believe the incidents were perpetrated to express solidarity with defendants in the November 17 terrorism trial.  A new group, calling itself the Labor Association for Social Rebellion-Post Midnight Slalom claimed responsibility for all five of these explosive attacks.  In their written statement, the group writes, Seven persons who were arrested have been in prison for the past three months, based on weak incriminating evidence.  They are accused of participating in the Thessaloniki incidents.  The group also condemned the upcoming Olympic games and expressed solidarity with November 17 members.
The People's War Group (PWG) was found by Indian police to be responsible for the ambush on Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu on October 1.  According to the police, there was an explosion at a nearby Hindu temple where Naidu and another ministers were on their way to worship.  The PWG later claimed responsibility for the attack, and said in a statement faxed to several papers, that it was a judicious move to eliminate a person who has been perpetuating state sponsored violence.  A preliminary police report indicated that approximately 17 landmines were planted near the blast site. Naidu and another minister suffered minor injuries in the attack.
A letter bomb was delivered to the office of the Sardinia Regional Authority in downtown Rome.  An alert was issued and the device was safely defused.  The sender of this letter, and a parcel bomb that was delivered only moments earlier to the Italian Labor Ministry, was  the Societa Editoriale Sarda (Sardinian Publishing Company).
A group calling itself Strollad Breizh Dieub (Party of a Free Brittany) claimed responsibility for an explosive attack, which caused only minor damage to a gendarmerie in Matignon.  The group says the attack, is in response to the continuing detention of six Breton hostages, which refers to detainees arrested in connection with previous attacks carried out in Brittany Province.  The end of the letter was signed, Bevet breizh dieub ha sokialour (Long live a free, socialist Brittany).
Explosive experts disarmed a motorcycle bomb found in a parking lot in Puerto Lleras.  The bomb was made of six kg of a powerful explosive. It in unknown who was responsible for the bomb.
A group of unidentified militants opened fire on Hindu devotees, who had gone to a temple for a Hindu festival.  It is not known who was responsible for the attack, but some reports claim that four foreign mercenaries were involved.
A Protestant family was targeted by unknown perpetrators in Randalstown.  The assailants smashed windows in the home and set a car outside on fire.  The residents of the home have fled the area since the attack.  There has been a rise in sectarian violence in the region in recent days.
Unknown bombers threw an explosive at Conatel's (Venezuela's national telecommunications commission) headquarters.  The bomb, thrown from a motorcycle,  shattered windows and destroyed the entrance to the building.  It is suspected that the attack was an act of revenge following the Conatel telecommunications regulatory agency's raid on opposition-loaded Globovision the day before.
Annalena Tonelli, a sixty year old Italian aid worker, was shot dead next to her clinic. Ms. Tonelli was working in Somalia managing a project for the treatment of tuberculosis. There are conflicting reports on the identity of the gunmen, however, the operation does seem to indicate planning and some degree of professionalism.
Jose Rafael Caliz, a peace adviser,was kidnapped by the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) in the Meta Department. The government official was traveling in La Uribe area on a humanitarian mission when he was abducted.
An employee of the Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq (SCIRI) was killed in a mortar attack on the party's offices in Kirkuk.  The SCIRI's leader Ayatollah Muhammed Baqer al-Hakim was killed along with eighty-two others in a car bombing in Najaf on August 29.
An explosive device, made up of a steel pot full of explosive and connected to a timer, was discovered and defused in front of an Iberia (Spanish airlines) office in downtown Rome.  The device was similar to one that was planted in June outside a Spanish school and was later claimed by the Four C's (Cells against Capitalism) Italian anarchist group.
At 1:00 am an explosion took place outside of a police department warehouse in Quito.  Initially it was thought to have been caused by a large stick of dynamite, but was later labeled as a pamphlet bomb.  According to the Red Cross, the Revolutionary Youth of Ecuador are responsible for the attack. The blast  injured one police officer and damaged some large windows.
In what police are calling a sectarian attack, a man with an iron bar targeted a group of boys from St. Gabriel's Secondary School on the Crumlin Road in Belfast.  The man attempted to grab one of the boys, but they managed to escape without injury.  The perpetrator escaped on a motor scooter.  This incident came amid heightened sectarian violence all over Northern Ireland in recent weeks.
A bomb exploded outside the political headquarters of Jacqueline Barreto, who is running for the municipal council of El Carmen de Bolivar.  The explosion cause only minor damage to the outside walls of the building.  It is unknown who carried out the attack.
A shot was fired at the home of a retired prison police officer, in Bangor.  The family, which included two teenaged boys, was home at the time of the attack, but were uninjured.  Authorities believe that the family was attacked by loyalists, specifically the Ulster Defense Association (UDA), who issued a warning to prison staff after a report found that republican and loyalist prisoners should be held separately.  There have been a number of attacks targeting prison staff members' homes in recent weeks.
A molotov cocktail was thrown at a building which houses the Justice and Development Party (AKP) and the Republican People's Party (CHP) in Seyhan in Adana Province.  The device smashed the windows of the building, but caused no injuries.  Authorities found slogans, in favor of separatist organizations, written on the walls of the premises.  CHP's Adana Province leader, Serdar Seyhan believes that the attack was carried out by circles that do not want democracy in Turkey.
Israeli forces foiled an attempted bombing of a Jewish settlement in Gaza, shooting and killing one of the attackers. Israeli forces opened fire on three Palestinians trying to place a bomb inside the settlement of Morag. The other two attackers fled the area, where Israeli soldiers found and defused thress explosive devices.
Rigoberto Hernandez Ortiz, Murillo council president, was abducted from his farm and later killed.  It is suspected that his murder was carried out by the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC).
A suicide bomber detonated a car packed with explosives outside the Baghdad Hotel housing Iraqi government leaders and US contractors. At least eight people, including the bomber, were killed and as many as forty others were wounded.  The wounded included one member of Iraq's Governing Council and three Americans. Al-Qaeda has claimed responsibility for the attack.
Abdullah Shahad al-Juburi, the governor of Diyala province, was attacked with a roadside bomb near Muqdadiyah. Two policemen who traveled with the governor and a passer-by were injured in the blast.
A concussion grenade detonated behind an office of the Justice and Development Party (AKP) in Istanbul Province.  This incident came on the same night that several political party offices were attacked all over the country.  The AKP is the ruling party in Turkey and last week the parliament passed a motion to send troops to Iraq to join US military troops.  The attacks may be in connection to this decision.
The al-Aqsa Martyr Brigades (Hamas) claimed responsibility for hurling an explosive device at an Israeli patrol in the eastern district of Tulkarem. They state on their website that there were Israeli casualties but this has yet to be confirmed by an independent source.
A massive explosion ripped apart a US diplomatic vehicle killing three Americans and wounding one in the first attack on a US target in three years of Israeli-Palestinian fighting. The bomb went off as a three-car US diplomatic convoy with a Palestinian police escort drove near a gas station on the outskirts of Beit Lahiya in northern Gaza.  The explosion was set off by a remote-controlled roadside bomb. The attack was claimed by a group calling itself The Popular Resistance Committees in an anonymous phone call. The caller stated the attack was in response to Israel's recent actions in Rafah, referring to a series of major incursions into the Gaza town in recent days.  The attack was also claimed by a group calling itself Ansar al-Qaida.  Israeli sources believe it to be the work of Hamas.
A bomb went off in the Agriculture Development Office in Nuwakot, causing damage to the building, but no injuries were reported.  Maoists were believed to be responsible for the attack.
An explosive device, consisting of explosive powder in a container with nails attached, partially exploded in front of the home of a retired prison officer in Donaghadee.  This is the tenth attack on prison officers' homes in recent weeks.  The explosion blew a hole in the front door of the home but caused no injuries.  The recent attacks have been linked to a prisoners' dispute in which a study found that republican and loyalist prisoners should be held separately.
Unidentified assailants hurled a grenade at the home of pro-India politician Ghulam Rubani, injuring his wife, two daughters, and a son.  No one had been arrested in connection with the attack.
Loyalists are being blamed for planting two explosive devices in the Ballymurphy neighborhood, a Roman Catholic area of Belfast.  Both devices were defused by bomb experts and no injuries were caused.  The Ballymurphy area is a well-known stronghold for the Irish Republican Army (IRA) paramilitary group.  This attempted attack took place as Sinn Fein, the IRA political wing is holding peace talks with the main Protestant party.
Unknown assailants attacked the home of Chief Minister Mufti Mohammad Sayeed, who heads the elected state government, by using grenades.  Two soldiers were killed in the attack in the exchange of firing that followed, and four were injured, including two press photographers.  Three different militant groups claimed responsibility for the attack - Al-Nasirin, Farzandan-e-Milat, and Al-Mansurian.
All twenty-two candidates for the city council and mayor's office in the Hacari Municipality withdrew from the race after five of the candidates were abducted and held overnight on Oct. 18 by the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC). The candidates were released with a letter claiming that anyone elected in the municipality would be considered a military target.
Unknown gunmen fired machine guns at a sub-prefecture building in Sartene, in southern Corsica.  There were no reported injuries.  This attack came only a few days after French Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy visited the island, and after four explosive attacks in Bastia and Ajaccio damaged apartment buildings and a restaurant.  On 30 October, the Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC) claimed responsibility for nine attacks that took place in October, targeting administrative buildings and police forces.  It is unclear if this attack is one of those claimed.
The home of a prison officer, in Ballyduff, was attacked with petrol bombs, by unknown perpetrators.  This is one of two petrol bomb attacks on prison officers' homes on this evening and the latest in a series of attacks since a review of prisons reported that republican and loyalist prisoners should be held separately.
A bomb exploded outside the campaign headquarters of Eugenio Gomez Diaz, a retired Army Major, who is running for Mayor of Cimitarra. The explosion was followed by guns being fired at the building. The attack caused minor damage.  Gomez has received numerous threats during his campaign.
A remote controlled explosive was detonated under a mail and luggage railcar of train no. 487 heading from Narzan to Moscow. The explosion occurred in Ingushetia. Investigators found wires stretching from where the bomb was planted to the nearby woods. The bomb left a large crater in the ground and damaged two ties and a rail. Its strength was estimated at 4-5 kilos of TNT. Although the train was carrying passengers, only the two conductors were injured. The train was also carrying police servicemen and equipment coming from Chechnya. Investigators suspected that they may have been the target of the attack. Investigators also found an additional bomb at the site. They believed that the second bomb was intended to have gone off at the same time as the other one, which would have caused  major damage to the train.
A package full of dynamite exploded in the headquarters of the Social Christian Party, nearly destroying the three story building.  The president of the party, Pascual del Cioppo, denounced the attacks and said that they prove that terrorism has returned to Ecuador.  No one was injured.
An explosive device detonated at the electricity department in Jalalabad city.  This was one of three explosive attacks that took place in the city that the authorities are blaming on the Taliban and Al Qaeda.  There were no reported injuries.
An explosive rocket was fired into a riot police barracks in Asptretto, near Ajaccio, on the island of Corsica.  The rocket caused little damage because the explosive charge failed.  On 30 October, the Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC) claimed responsibility for nine attacks that took place in October that targeted administrative buildings and members of the police.  It is unclear if this incident is one of those claimed.
A bomb exploded in Laureles, a neighborhood in Medellin, just as polls were opening.  The bomb was placed in a sewer drain close to Atanasio Girardot stadium, where more than 200 voting tables had been set up.  Local authorities indicated that the bomb was an attempt to intimidate voters.  Little property damage was done and no one was injured in the blast.
A petrol bomb was thrown at a home in Lisannally Gardens, in Armagh, where a pregnant woman lives.  The device caused minor scorch damage to the front door and the woman had to be treated for shock, but there were no major injuries.  Authorities are unsure if this was a sectarian attack but several homes in the area have been targeted in recent weeks.
A bomb explosion in the toilet of the Delhi-bound Shalimar Express train derailed five cars and the engine of the train, but caused no casualties.  No one has claimed responsibility for the incident, but two militants believed to be responsible for the attack were killed by police in a gunbattle from which a third suspect escaped.
Five suicide car bomb attacks took place in Baghdad on this day, the first day of Ramadan.  The fourth of these blasts took place at a police station in the Al-Shaab neighborhood of the city, about ten minutes after the major blast at the International Committee of the Red Cross.  The suicide bomber was killed and around eight people were injured.  The police station targeted had received a letter threatening such an attack in the days prior to the blast.
A petrol bomb was left on the windowsill of a home in Armagh.  The elderly couple who live in the house were treated for shock after the device detonated.  The blast smashed the windows and set the curtains ablaze.  This attack takes place less than 48 hours after a pregnant woman's home was attacked in the same area.  Authorities are unsure if these attacks are sectarian, but there has been an increase in violence in the area in recent weeks.
Unidentified terrorists threw hand grenades at the Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited head office in Srinagar, which is a communications office in a very heavily guarded area, killing one person and injuring forty.
One policeman and a Frontier Corps official were killed and five others wounded when a bomb planted by unidentified assailants exploded at a police picket near the Bhitai Colony Police Station in Jacobabad.
The Rodat District of Nangarhar Province came under fire by unknown gunmen.  The attack did not cause any casualties.
At least two people were critically injured when four carriages of a train in Guwahati jumped off the rails due to a powerful bomb. Police believe the attack was likely carried out by the National Democratic Front of Bodoland who has executed similar attacks in the past.  The group operates out of nearby Bhutan, using bases there to carry out hit and run guerilla attacks in India's northeastern state of Assam.  Other sources claim it was another militant group, the United Liberation Front of Assam.
Unidentified assailants attacked the Nangarhar Province airport with rockets, causing no casualties.  Although it is not clear who was responsible for the attack, some sources indicate the Taliban or al-Qaeda may have been responsible.
Unknown assailants shot dead the vice president of an appeals court in Mosul. The attack is the latest in a series which has targeted judges and politicians in Iraqi provinces.
During the Bashkir presidential election campaign, a car containing a radio-controlled explosive device was blown up just as a Toyota landcruiser carrying the bodyguards of the Baskortostan president's son was driving past. Two bodyguards were killed in the incident and two were injured.  On April 29, sources reported that three suspects, including one resident of Ufa and two of Chechnya, had been arrested in March on suspicion of involvement in the attack. A large number of weapons were found on the men at the time of their arrest.
Three bank branches on the corner of Mitropoleos and Kapnikareas Streets, in central Athens were attacked with gas canisters and Molotov cocktails.  The attacks took place at the same time that US Director of the FBI, Robert Mueller was in Athens to view Olympic games preparations and security systems.  The banks targeted were a Commercial Bank, a Bank of Cyprus and a Eurobank.  There was limited damage caused to all three branches.  An unidentified man called an Athens newspaper to claim responsibility for the attacks and to state that they were perpetrated to welcome the FBI director, and to demand the release of nineteen people being held in connection to the November 17 terrorist group.
A group of suspected Taliban militants attacked district government offices, including the Khak-e-Afghan administrative building in Kabul with unspecified weapons.  No civilians were killed in the attack, but seven militants and one government militiaman were killed.  The Taliban also reportedly kidnapped four close relatives of the district chief and threatened to kill them unless the governor surrendered the district to the militants.
An explosive device detonated in Moriani-Plage, on the island of Corsica at an organization which provides home help assistance, causing slight damage to the premises.  This is one of two attacks carried out on this evening that targeted municipal offices on the island.
A powerful parcel bomb was delivered to Gianluigi Basilietti, a reporter for the Corriere di Vierbo, in the town of Viterbo.  The device, which was delivered to the daily's office and brought into the editorial room, was defused by bomb disposal experts.  It had failed to detonate because it was damaged in the mail and some of the gunpowder had leaked out.  This is the most recent incident in a series of parcel bomb attacks that has taken place all over Italy.  Most devices have been sent to police headquarters and municipal offices up to this point.
A car bomb placed in an unmarked vehicle exploded in front of the UN Assistance Mission to Afghanistan office in Kandahar, and is thought to be the first attack against the UN in Afghanistan.  Two persons were injured in the attack, but none killed.  No one has claimed responsibility for the attack, however, the Taliban are suspected as they have been responsible for a series of recent attacks on foreign aid workers in Afghanistan.
Zuly Esther Codina Perez, a Saturday morning radio program host, was killed by unidentified attackers.  Codina Perez was also involved in union activities, but was not known to have been threatened by any armed group.
A letter, laced with ricin, was intercepted in a sorting office before it was to be delivered to the White House.  Authorities safely disposed of the ricin without incident, but did not disclose the potential attack to the public for three months.  The government claims that they did not make the incident public because the ricin posed no public health risk.  The letter containing the substance was signed by Fallen Angel the same author of a similar ricin-laced letter intercepted in October.  Both letters complained about pending federal trucking regulations.
A group calling itself 'Revolutionary Solidarity' claimed responsibility for placing gas canisters at five bank branches in Greece.  The first of these attacks took place at a National Bank.  The group carried out these actions to show solidarity for the 7 individuals detained during the EU Summit episodes.
A group calling itself 'Revolutionary Solidarity' claimed responsibility for placing gas canisters at five bank branches and a New Democracy office in Greece.  The last of these attacks took place at an office of the New Democracy on Koritsas Street in Egaleo .  The group carried out these actions to show solidarity for the 7 individuals detained during the EU Summit episodes.
At least twenty-three people (plus the two bombers) were killed and over 300 injured when two suicide bombers drove pickup trucks full of explosives outside two synagogues in Istanbul.  Both the Turkish extremist group, the Islamic Great East Raiders' Front (IBDA-C) and Al Qaeda have claimed the attack, though authorities believe the Al Qaeda claim to be more credible.  On 19 November, authorities arrested twenty people that they believe are connected to this attack, all are Turkish residents.  The two suicide bombers were also Turks and had visited Afghanistan in recent years.  The man suspected of ordering and planning this attack was arrested on 30 November as he attempted to flee Turkey through a border crossing with Iran.  In late December, police had seized over 500 kilograms of explosives in Istanbul, which they believe were to be used in similar attacks in Turkey.  On 31 May, the trial of sixty-nine suspected Turkish al Qaeda members opened in connection with this attack.  In June 2005, four of these suspects were expected to get life in prison for the attack and also for being a member of a terrorist organization.   In January 2006, police arrested Loa'I Mohammad Haj Bakr al-Saqa, a prominent Al Qaeda member believed to be behind these Istanbul attacks.  Al-Saqa eluded police for years by faking his own death and remaining hidden in Turkey.
Orlando Rafael Salgado, the Mayor-Elect of Zapayan was murdered by hired killers.  Salgado was traveling in Barranquilla and scheduled to attend a community council chaired by Colombian President Alvaro Uribe.  The attack took place as Salgado accompanied several family members to a first communion.  It is unknown who is responsible for the attacks although it was reported the United Self Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) are active in the area.
Several explosive charges were found at an exit of the Ajaccio law courts, on the island of Corsica.  The devices, which were explosive charges connected to an electrical source, were defused by bomb experts.  The premises was under construction and only construction workers were present at the time of the incident.
A group of unknown radicals fired an explosive device, made up of a firework rocket, at the home of Estanis Amutxastegi, a Socialist Party of the Basque Country (PSE) representative councilor and deputy mayor of Andoain.  The blast caused a fire that destroyed the flat, but caused no injuries.  This attack comes after a ten month ceasefire in the Basque country that has lasted since February 2003.
A terrorist opened fire in the Jordan border crossing terminal north of Eilat, wounding five individuals on a tour from South Africa as they made their way from Jordan to Israel before Israeli soldiers shot and killed him. Jordanian sources stated that the man acted alone.  One of the tourists died of her injuries the following day.
At least two explosions rocked downtown Istanbul, near the British and Israeli consulates, the HSBC Bank headquarters and the Metro City shopping center. Health officials stated that at least twenty-eight people were killed and 450  injured.  A man calling the semi-official Anatolia news agency claimed that al-Qaeda and the Islamic militant group IBDA-C carried out the attacks.  Later a statement was issued by a unit of the al Qaeda network, Abu Hafz al-Masri Brigades, claimed responsibility for the explosions.  Nine people were being held on 25 November in connection with these attacks.  They are being charged with belonging to, aiding and abetting an illegal organization.  In late December, Turkish police had seized over 500 kilograms of explosives which they believe were to be used in similar attacks.  On 31 May, sixty-nine suspected members of a Turkish al Qaeda cell were put on trial for connection with this attack and a second at a synagogue in Istanbul.  In January 2006, police arrested Loa'I Mohammad Haj Bakr al-Saqa, a prominent Al Qaeda member believed to be behind these Istanbul attacks.  Al-Saqa eluded police for years by faking his own death and remaining hidden in Turkey.
At least three Iraqis were killed and fifteen wounded in Kirkuk when a suicide bomber blew up a car packed with 200kg of explosives at a checkpoint near the offices of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) and the Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP).
The British Embassy in Tehran was hit by a firebomb in broad daylight causing some fire damage to the mission's gate but no casualties.
Two donkey carts loaded with rockets were found by the Embassy of Italy.  At the same time, a series of rocket attacks hit the center of Baghdad. Blasts were reported at the Ministry of Oil and two hotels that are frequented by journalists.
Two security guards were shot dead near the neighborhood of Abu Dis near a section of the security barrier under construction. The two men were guarding construction equipment being used for the barrier.  An initial claim of responsibility by Jenin Martyrs' Brigades, a faction associated with al-Fatah, took credit for the attack.
An explosion occurred outside the Intercontinental Hotel in Kabul, but caused no casualties and little property damage.  The Intercontinental houses numerous foreign diplomats, journalists, and UN aid workers.  The Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack the next day and warned of further attacks aimed at foreigners.
A bomb went off two or three meters behind the car of Chechnya's Deputy Interior Prime Minister Col. Sultan Satuyev. Satuyev was injured as were the police officers traveling with him. The explosive was believed to have been a radio-controlled landmine which was planted on the road side. Investigators were at the scene carrying out their investigation.
A member of the Iraqi Civil Defense Force in Baqubah was wounded when two unknown assailants called him a traitor before stabbing him. The attackers managed to flee.  Attacks have increased against Iraqi security forces, accused of collaborating with the US-led forces in Iraq.
Hermes Flor Montenegro, a municipal councilor of El Tambo, was shot and killed while traveling back to El Tambo after attending a meeting out of town.  The attack took place on a rural road, and it is unknown what motivated the attack.
A school which serves as a polling station in the Chechen settlement of Mesker-Yurt was attacked by unknown assailants using firearms. The policeman who was guarding the school was fatally injured in the attack. Investigators were searching for the attackers.
A Colombian civilian contractor was killed and two colleagues were wounded in a firearms attack on their convoy in Balad.
Two unknown individuals threw a grenade at the home of Cielo Gonzales Villa, the mayor-elect of Neiva.  Gonzales was not home at the time of the explosion, but two others were injured.
A group of unknown perpetrators fired shots, with long-barreled weapons, at a police station in Dargecit, in Mardin Province.  One police officer was killed by the shots.  No further information is provided.
A bomb was found and defused by United Nations special forces and Kosovo Force (KFOR) police before it exploded. The bomb was found in the northern part of Kosovska Mitrovica and was defused through a controlled explosion. The bomb had been planted near a power sub station and a student dormitory. It is unclear which was the intended target of the attack.  There were no reported injuries.
A group of unknown men threw a bomb at a mosque in Kandahar.  The preacher of the mosque works for the government, and claims the attack was directed towards him.
A bomb exploded in central Tbilisi between Rustavi-2 studios and the Georgian state TV building. The explosion broke the windows of the Georgian state TV building and damaged the radio wing of Rustavi-2, but the TV station continued to broadcast. The attack was believed to have been an act of sabotage intended to further destabilize the nation in the face of the upcoming elections. Investigators remain on the scene and are continuing to investigate the incident.  On December 4, ITAR-TASS reported that Georgian security officials had detained a man, Alexander Shomakhiya, a resident of Tbilisi, for planning and executing the attack. A large arms cache, containing detonators, anti-tank grenades, and hand grenades, was found in a building owned by Shomakhiya. Officials suspect that tests will show that the explosives in the cache are the same as those used in the blast and possibly in other explosions in Georgia.
The governor of Shabwa in southeast Yemen was wounded in an ambush and his brother, a top intelligence official, was killed in the attack.  Ali Ahmad al-Rasas and his brother Rasas Ahmad were 250 miles southeast of Sanaa in the al-Baidah governorate when gumen attacked their car. Tribal forces in al-Baidah stated that the attack was by the Islamist group Takfir wal Hijra.
One Afghan census worker was killed and four others were injured in an ambush in Dellarm, Farah.  A spokesman for the Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack.
Unknown attackers fired a rocket into a field near the US Embassy in Kabul less than two hours after US Defense Secretary Rumsfeld left the capital.  There were no reports of injuries in the blast about 300 yards from the embassy and 100 yards from international peacekeeping heaquarters.  No arrests have been made.
The US administrator of Iraq, Ambassador Paul Bremer, escaped a rebel ambush on his convoy the day of a visit by US Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld. Bremer was riding in an armored civilian vehicle when a roadside bomb exploded and guerillas attacked with small arms fire.  No one was injured.
The military wing of Hamas, the Izz al-Din al-Qassam Brigades, claimed responsibility for firing mortars at the Gush Qatif settlement. There were no injuries reported.  In addition, mortars were fired at the industrial zone and the Ganney Tal settlment.
A hand grenade was planted near the home of President Shevardnadze's daughter. The device was found following an anonymous call made to the flat where Shevardnadze's daughter lives in which the caller said that an explosive device had been planted in their house. Following an inspection, members of the Ministry of Internal Affairs found a hand grenade wrapped as a parcel.
An Afghan engineer with the NGO, Bahar, was killed following an attack on his vehicle.  Five assailants attacked his vehicle in the Gelan District of Ghazni Province.  The intent of the attack is unknown and under investigation after the assailants were arrested.
Unidentified perpetrators left a gas canister explosive device at a supermarket in Thessaloniki.  Only minimal damage was caused to the premises.  This is one of three explosive attacks on this evening in Thessaloniki.
Sociologist Fernando Piscoitti Vanstralem, a member of the lower chamber of congress in el Banco, was found shot to death. Apparently, he was driving on a road near el Banco when he was stopped by the assailants and shot. Piscoitti had previously been a mayor and councilman before becoming a member of congress.  It is unknown who carried out the attack or what was the motive.
Three people were killed and six other injured when a bomb exploded in a hardware shop at Makum in Tinsukia District.
A bomb exploded near the office of Magti, a cell phone company owned by former Georgian President Shevardnadze's son-in-law. The windows of the building were shattered but no casualties were reported.
The Proletarian Resistance claimed responsibility for an arson attack that was perpetrated against a car, bearing US license plates in Glyfadha.  The unknown assailants doused the car in flammable liquid and set it alight.  The flames damaged the car but caused no injuries.  In their claim of responsibility, the group references the recent indictment of several November 17 terror members, it was a fair response to the verdict of their supposedly fair trial.  The representatives of the US junta are free today, while those who fought them are convicted to 21 life terms in white cells and with a complete lack of evidence.  The struggle against imperialism continues.  Solidarity for 17N's populist fighters.
Members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) bombed the Ram-Janaki Hindu temple in Nijgadh.  The temple was newly completed and had been paid for by contributions from locals.
A group that calls itself, Immediate Action claimed responsibility for placing fire gas canisters under a Jeep that belongs to a construction company in Thessaloniki.  The Jeep was parked in front of a Public Power Corporation (DEI) branch when it was attacked.  Material damage was caused to the Jeep and to the DEI offices, but there were no reported injuries.
A bomb exploded in the center of Strumica, in front of the House of Culture. According to police, there were no injuries. Authorities were investigating the incident, and noted that nearby residents were upset by the blast.
An explosive device, consisting of a firework, was pushed through the mail slot of a home in Bottle.  The family, who were asleep at the time of the explosion, managed to escape injury.  The blast caused a large explosion that blew the windows out of two cars parked in the driveway and damaged five nearby houses.
A group of unidentified gunmen attacked cleric Mawalai Amir Mohammad as he was performing evening prayers in the Kajaki District of Helmand province.  The attackers, who were armed, seriously injured the cleric, who is said to be an Afghan government sympathizer and had been supporting the government in his sermons.  The method of attack is not mentioned.
A suspected suicide attacker detonated a car bomb outside an Iraqi police station in Khaldiyah, 50 miles west of Baghdad, killing at least seventeen people and injuring thirty-three.  No American soldiers were in the area when the bomb exploded.
An attempt was made on the life of President Pervez Musharraf, when a bridge blew up in Rawalpindi just seconds after his motorcade passed over it.  No one claimed responsibility for the attack, which came just hours after a visit from Indonesian Prime Minister Megawati.  Later, two remote detonated bombs were found under the bridge.  In May 2005, a senior Al Qaeda leader, Abu Farraj al-Libbi, was arrested in Pakistan.  Al-Libbi is believed to be the third in command of the group and is accused of masterminding the attempts on President Musharraf's life in December 2003.
An explosion occurred outside the house of Teimuraz Shashiashvili, one of the leading presidential candidates for the upcoming elections in Georgia. No injuries or fatalities were reported, and investigators were looking into the incident.
An explosive device equivalent to 3 kg of explosives was found near the building of the city administration in Stavropol and was safely defused by police. The bomb was found in a garbage box in the backyard of the administration building by office cleaners and drivers. Officials also noted that the administration building is in the most populated area of the city.
At least twenty-seven people were killed and another forty injured when a large explosive device, made of over 1,000 pounds of explosives, detonated in central Baghdad.  The device, which was in the form of a car bomb, detonated outside the Mount Lebanon Hotel, where many foreigners stay.  At least two of the victims were British.  The blast also took place near a company which provides mobile phone service to the Baghdad area.  On 19 March, Al Qaeda claimed responsibility for the blast.  In their statement, the group writes, woe to the Americans and their allies from what is waiting for them in Iraq.
Suspected followers of Saddam shot to death Muhammad al-Hakim, a representative of the Islamic Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution and a member of a prominent political family. Al-Hakim was head of security at the Education Ministry and cousin of Abdel-Azziz al-Hakim, the Governing Council president at the time.
A former Baath party official was killed in Najaf (80 miles) south of Baghdad. Gunmen killed Ali Qassam al-Tamami, a former local official under the Baathist regime and Mohammad Mokhtar Khaayr inside an electric supply store.
Two small explosive devices, that were hidden in trash cans, exploded near the home of Romano Prodi, the European Union Commission President, in Bologna.  The devices were made up of a cooking pot, a gas cylinder and a timer and detonated when no one was at the home.  A group that called themselves the Informal Anarchic Federation claimed responsibility for the attack.  In their written claim, the group states, today we have hit at the apparatus of control that is repressive and leading the democratic show that is the new European order.
An explosive device was found at the entrance to a postal sorting office in Corte, on the island of Corsica.  The detonator of the device failed to function and there were no injuries or damages caused.
An explosive device was discovered and defused at the home of Mario Diana, the Oristano Provincial Administration Chairman on the island of Sardinia.  The device didn't have time to explode because a surveillance system caught the strange parcel and the Finance Police were immediately called.  This is one of a number of explosive attacks on the island in recent days.
Some thirty-five Awami League activists were injured in a bomb attack on the council venue of the party's Begumganj Thana unit in Begumganj upazila.  Witnesses said anywhere from seven to eight bombs were hurled at League supporters.
Unknown perpetrators attacked a convoy of the Joint Verification Team from Bhutan.  A mob attacked the team as they were on their way to Damak, in eastern Nepal, to carry out directives from the Ministerial Join Committee.  The manner of attack is not specified.
A roadside bomb planted at the back gate of the Mar Yousif church (Iraqi Christian) blew up in Baghdad smashing windows and damaging nearby homes. The blast resulted in no casualties. Last month a bomb was found at the gate of the church and was defused.
Projectiles were fired at the Sheraton Hotel in the Green Zone of Baghdad, a place which houses mostly westerners.  The hotel was shelled over the course of two days, 24 and 25 December, from both the front and the back of the premises.  The eighth floor of the hotel was damaged by the devices, but there were no reports of casualties at the hotel.  One of the projectiles, which was aimed at the hotel, accidentally hit an adjacent apartment building, injuring three tenants.  This was one of six attacks in Baghdad that were seemingly coordinated.
A United Nations guest house was hit by a bomb.  The blast destroyed a wall, but caused no casualities.  A nearby pharmacy was also damaged.  This is another of a series of explosions that have occurred in Kabul since the convening of the Loya Jirga Grand Assembly.
The German Embassy in the Karrada district of Baghdad was the target of a rocket attack on Christmas day.  A shell hit the first floor of the building, starting a fire, which damaged offices and shattering windows.  One man at the embassy was reportedly struck in the attack.  This was one of six seemingly coordinated attacks in the Green Zone.
Four rockets were fired at the US Coalition government headquarters in the Green Zone of Baghdad.  Two of the devices hit the parking lot of the premises but only caused minor damage.  The headquarters lies on the western bank of the Tigris River.  Following the attack, US soldiers arrested five people in connection with the attack.  This was one of six seemingly coordinated attacks within the Green Zone during the Christmas holiday.
Two low-intensity bombs exploded at the railway tracks near the Shah Faisal Colony in Karachi.  There were no reported injuries or damages caused.
A parcel bomb, which was contained inside a book, was sent to the home of Romano Prodi, the European Union (EU) Commission President, in Bologna.  The parcel exploded in Prodi's hands but there were no reported injuries.  In the following week, four other similar parcel bombs were delivered to other EU institutions and leaders all over Europe.  In May 2005, Italian authorities arrested five people they suspect of putting together pot and parcel bombs that were delivered between 2001 and 2004 to various locations.  This may have been one of those attacks.
Unknown gunmen opened fire at the offices of a US NGO, Research and Training Institute, in Kirkuk killing an Iraqi security guard.
A single shot was fired through the front windows of two separate homes in Newtownards.  Two children were asleep in the first home and three were at home in the second, though there were no reported injuries.  Authorities are unsure of a motive for the attacks.
There was an attack on the Rustavi-2 Television station in Tbilisi. An armour-piercing missile was shot at the building. The attack occurred in the morning and officials believe that it was a 'genuine destabilization' attempt made against a TV station which played a major role in the events of November. The Georgian National Security Council held a special meeting to discuss this latest act of terrorism. This attack is one of several perpetrated against national media organizations in recent weeks.
A parcel bomb was sent to the headquarters of the European Union's (EU) police organization, Europol, in the Hague, Netherlands.  The device had been addressed to Jurgen Storbeck, the Europol Director.  The package looked suspicious and was scanned by explosives experts, who determined that it contained explosives.  The package, like two others in the past couple days sent to EU officials, was postmarked in Bologna, Italy.  Authorities believe that Italian anarchists are behind the attacks.  In May 2005, Italian authorities arrested five people they suspect of putting together pot and parcel bombs that were delivered between 2001 and 2004 to various locations.  This may have been one of those attacks.
The apartment of a Transport Ministry official was completely destroyed by an explosive device. This comes after two recent attacks on vehicles owned by the Ministry of Transport and Telecommunications. On January 29, officials arrested two suspects believed to have been behind all three attacks.
Authorities are blaming loyalists for planting two pipe bombs at a bar in Coleraine.  Neither device exploded and they were both taken away by experts for examination.  A telephone warning was made, which led authorities to the location of the devices.
Ten people were killed and at least thirty others injured when an explosive device detonated at a music concert in Peureulak, in Aceh Province.  The blast caused major damage to the stage and destroyed many musical instruments.  Authorities are blaming Aceh separatists, namely the Free Aceh Movement (GAM), but the group denies responsibility, stating that they never target civilians.  Most of the dead and injured were Indonesian teenagers.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) fighters from the 48th front placed eleven explosive charges on the Trans-Andean Pipeline between Puerto Colon and San Miguel.  There were no injuries or fatalities reported, but services were stopped while ECOPETROL sent out technicians to repair the line.
Unknown perpetrators threw two petrol bombs into an upstairs flat in the Castleview area of Killyleagh.  One of the devices smashed the front window of the flat and caused minor damage, the other fell short and landed in a garden.  No one was home at the time of the incident and there were no reported injuries.  Authorities are unsure of the motive for this attack.
A group of unidentified men have attacked a mass of handicapped Afghans in Kabul during a demonstration for unity and for settling difference within the framework of the Higher Coucil.   The men attacked the demonstrators as they were on their way to the UN.  They also attacked an Al-Jazeerah cameraman, seized the videotape and destroyed the camera.
A parcel bomb detonated in the office of Gary Titley, a member of parliament from the United Kingdom, in Manchester.  Mr. Titley is the head of the Labour Group in the European Parliament.  The device caught fire as it was being opened and the flames spread throughout the office.  There were no reported injuries.  This is the sixth parcel bomb in a week's time to be sent to European Union officials all over Europe.  All the packages were sent from Bologna, Italy and most likely sent by Italian anarchists.
Two police officers were killed as they attempted to defuse an explosive device that was strapped to a motorcycle and parked at the Diana shopping mall in Pattani.  Authorities are blaming this attack, and other similar attacks in recent days on the Muslim separatist group, Mujahideen.
A vehicle operated by the NGO, Shelter for Life, was seized by what are believed to be Taliban militants.  The vehicle was taken at gunpoint along the Kabul-Kandahar highway.  The attackers also fired on a land cruiser, injuring two people when the vehicle did not stop after the perpertrators tried to flag it down.  Afghan officials suspect Taliban fighters.
An explosive device was found and defused in a market in Medan, in North Sumatra Province.  This device, which was found in the Sukaramai market, was identical to one that exploded twelve hours earlier near a bus terminal in the same city.  On 8 January, authorities arrested three men who they believe carried out both of these attacks.  All three men are believed members of the Free Aceh Movement (GAM).
Two police officers were slightly injured when a group of between ten and thirty gunmen attacked the Haiyaveng police station, in Yala Province.  Yala is a Muslim-dominated province in the south of Thailand and recently martial law was declared in the region because of a wave of separatist violence.
Masked men assaulted and beat Seif a-Din Shahin, a reporter for the al-Arabiya satellite television network. A few days after the attack, it emerged that the perpetrators of the attack were members of Fatah's al-Aqsa Brigades and that the assault had followed Shahin's live broadcast of the thousands who took part in fatah's anniversary celebrations a two weeks before. The report infuriated Palestinian Authority officials who had expected Shahin to report that tens of thousands had participated.  A similar event took place a few months prior when militants took over al-Arabiya's offices in Ramallah and beat up workers there.
Four people were killed when the explosive mine that they were attempting to plant, blew up.  The government claims they were members of the Taliban.  Two radios, four time bombs, some important documents, a remote control and some other items were found at the scene.
An explosive device detonated in a karaoke bar in Palopo, on the island of Sulawesi, killing four people and injuring three others.  Authorities believe that the bomb was left under a table and the perpetrator was not among the victims.  An incident like this is rare in the Palopo area, as the region is generally peaceful.
A driver was killed when he was attacked in his vehicle on the Gardez-Khost main road.  An eyewitness said the Taliban attacked the vehicle, which was carrying empty containers belonging to coalition forces.
A group of men wearing masks entered the house where a group of Chechen leader Kadyrov's security guards were staying. The men killed four of the security guards and took their weapons. The attack may have been motivated by the sentiment that Kadyrov is a puppet of Moscow.
Several bombs landed in Jalalabad during an important meeting in the Eastern Nangarhar Province.  One bomb hit a house injuring one person.
A female suicide bomber blew herself up at one of the entrances to Gaza's main Erex crossing terminal to Israel, killing three Israeli soldiers and a civilian and wounding twelve people.  Hamas and the al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade (Fatah), jointly claimed responsibility for the blast.  Hamas stated it used a woman suicide bomber for the first time in order to counter Israeli precautions.
Gunmen attacked a convoy of Kellog Brown and Root (KBR), a US contractor in Iraq that was carrying supplies for US military forces, killing three foreign nationals including two Pakistanis and a Turk. A US civilian and soldier were also injured in the attack. The attack occurred near Tiikrit when gunmen pulled alongside the convoy and opened fire on several trucks. Those who work with US contractors and support US forces are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
Thirteen people were injured and twelve vehicles were destroyed when two bombs exploded in Karachi.  The blasts occurred near the office of the Pakistan Bible Church Society and near the Holy Trinty Church.  According to reports, first a bomb planted in a Suzuki Hi-Roof went off and then a grenade was thrown from a motorcycle carrying two people.
Luis Alberto Campos, a municipal councilor in Puerto Guzman, was murdered.  Campos was dragged from his house and killed by a group who claimed to be from the 32nd Revolutionary Armed Forces of Columbia (FARC) front.  This is the first politician elected at the local level to be murdered this year.
Unknown gunmen opened fire on a caf in the Kavakbasi area of Akkoy, in Denizli Province.  The gunmen killed two people and injured six others.  No further information is provided.
A powerful bomb exploded on the campus of Khulna Government BL college.  A 30 year-old man, identified as Md Manju was caught by police after seen fleeing from the scene.  The police seized a mobile phone, bomb splinters and other bomb manufacturing materials.
An explosive device was discovered and defused at the entrance to the Olbia City Hall.  The device was low-strength and easily deactivated.  This was one of two explosive devices targeting government premises on this date.
An explosive device, which was strapped onto a motorcycle and parked outside of a convenience store in Pattani Province, was safely defused by police.  The device was hidden in the fuel tank of the motorcycle and authorities believe was intended to detonate while police officers were inspecting it.  This is the latest incident in southern Thailand since martial law was declared in the wake of widespread separatist violence.  The device found on this motorcycle is similar in nature to one a few weeks earlier that killed two police officers in the city of Pattani.
A holiday villa, belonging to a German national, was destroyed by two explosive charges in Ghisonaccia, on the island of Corsica.  There were no reported injuries.  On 28 January 2004, the Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC) of 22 October claimed responsibility for seven attacks against second homes in Corsica in recent weeks.  It is unclear if this attack was one of the ones claimed.  In their communiqu, the group writes that these premises deprives more and more Corsicans of the possibility of becoming home owners.
Two members of Iraq's Communist Party were killed in a bomb attack on their offices in Baghdad. The building in the district of New Baghdad collapsed in the explosion.
An Iraqi traffic policeman died and three others were injured, one seriously, when unknown gunmen opened fire from a car in Baghdad.
Two Buddhist monks, Pra Vichai and Novice Jepakak were killed by unknown perpetrators in Yala.  The monks were both slashed to death as they were walking on their morning rounds in separate parts of the city.  This attack comes two days after another monk was killed in the same way in Yala and also comes after martial law was declared in southern Thailand in the beginning of the month because of widespread separatist violence.
The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for firing two Qassam rockets against the Gadid settlement south of Gaza.
An explosive device detonated at the Audencia school in Nantes.  The Audencia school has been run since 1989 by Aissa Dermouche, a man who was recently named prefect of the eastern department of Jura.  Dermouche was born in Algeria and the first Muslim named to such a high position within the government.  A car belonging to Dermouche was targeted by an explosive device one week prior to this incident.  On 9 March, twelve members of a right-wing radical movement, were arrested and held in connection with this attack and two others that targeted Dermouche.
Two men, both Iraqi citizens, working for CNN were shot and killed by assailants outside of Baghdad. The pair was returning from an assignment in a two-car convoy when a man popped through the roof of a car and fired on them with an AK-47. A CNN cameraman in the second car was grazed in the head by a bullet. The four other individuals in the car were not injured.
Alleged paramilitaries shot at an international humanitarian mission as thirteen of its members traveled down the Magdalena River by boat. The mission included some members  from the Norwegian Council of Refugees and Project Counseling Service.  The attack was viewed as an attempt to prevent international organizations from helping displaced people in Colombia.
A pick-up truck carrying Iraqi Civil Defense Corps (ICDC) members was hit by an explosive device, packed with C-4 type explosives, concealed in a handcart on the roadside near the town of Baqubah. The US military had reports that four ICDC were wounded. An ICDC officer stated that another remote control device was later found in the area.
Khulna Awami Leader Monjur Morshed Labu died of injuries sustained in an attack. He was attacked by unidentified persons, who threw a bomb at him.
A security vehicle of Honduran Congress President Porfirio Lobo was fired on by unknown assailants.  Lobo was not in the vehicle at the time of the attack because he had decided to travel by air. Several members of his security team and a camera man were in the vehicle but where not injured. It is suspected that the attack is a result of Lobo's struggle against armed gangs and an ad campaign calling for combating criminals.
A number of cars were damaged when a powerful explosion occurred between the American University and the Ismail Xhemali primary school in the Suncani breg district of Pristina. Police were still looking for the perpetrators.
A group of gunmen and plain-clothes police officers attacked a group of alcohol vendors in Basra. British soldiers stationed in the area became involved in the shoot-out and two of the plain clothes policemen were killed.  Alcohol shops are the freqent target of attacks by extremists who feel alcohol sales violate strict Islamic law.
An explosion occurred inside one of the entrances to a five-storey apartment building in Bolshoi Gnezdnovsky Pereulok, in central Moscow. The bomb, made of 100 grams TNT, had been attached to the handle of the door to a private apartment belonging to journalist Yelena Tregubova, who until recently worked for three Russian dallies, Izvestia, Russky Telegraf, and Kommersant. Tregubova is best known for writing a book that gave a behind the scenes account of the Kremlin and criticized  Putin's rise to power and his attempts to control the media. Luckily, the bomb exploded moments before she left her apartment and so she was not injured. Tregubova said that she felt the attack was an attempt on her life and also commented that she believed her phone was tapped. Officials were still investigating.
A white powdery substance, which tested positive for ricin, was found in the mailroom of Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist, in Washington, DC.  The substance, which didn't harm anyone, was found on the south side of the fourth floor of the Dirksen Senate Office Building.  As a result, all three Senate office buildings were closed for a week.  This ricin letter is similar to two others that were sent in the fall of 2003 by a mysterious fallen angel.  The earlier letters threatened the White House and Transportation Department that more ricin letters would be sent if new federal trucking regulations were scrapped.  Authorities are investigating whether this most recent attack could be connected to the fall 2003 attacks.
An explosive device, made up of two small propane canisters, detonated outside a Eurobank branch in the Ano Patissia neighborhood of Athens.  The blast caused minor damage to the premises but no injuries.  Witnesses saw two unidentified men plant the devices and run away from the scene.
Jalabad airport came under rocket attack.  There were no reported injuries or casualties.  No further information is provided.
A bomb was detonated in the administrative center of Achkhoi Martan, but caused no victims. Officials were looking into the incident.
Unknown attackers threw grenades at the Asan Baba Mosque in an Albanian neighborhood in Macedonia. The windows and gutters of the mosque were broken during the attack. Officials were investigating the incident.
The military wing of Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility for firing two rockets against Neve Dekalim and Gadid settlement in Kahn Yunis (southern Gaza).  There were no injuries or damage reported.
Bomb disposal experts found an explosive device containing two high explosive mines, two shells for a 152mm assault gun, two bags of an explosive mixture, four electric detonators and a radio transmitter on the side of the Kavkaz federal highway. The bomb was defused. Officials believe that they already have identified one of the planners of the attack.
A car bomb with approximately 250 kilos of explosives blew up at a police station as dozens of would-be recruits lined up to apply for jobs. An apparent suicide operation, carried out by a driver who detinated his truck as it passed by the station.  Fifty-five people were killed and sixty-seven injured.  It is unclear if the bomber is part of the mortality count.
Several petrol bombs were thrown at police cars in Rossville Street and Nailors Row in Londonderry.  The officers were called into the area in response to reports of trouble and were bombarded upon their arrival.  This section of Londonderry is mainly Protestant.
A holiday villa, that belongs to a resident of mainland France, was partially destroyed by an explosive charge in Olmeto-Plage, near Propriano.  This is the second time this villa was targeted since March 2003.
A homemade explosive device detonated at the political office of Savvas Tsitouridhis, a New Democracy (ND) party candidate deputy, in Kilkis.  The device detonated, causing a minor fire at the premises, which burned itself out.
A child was killed in a blast in Palpa District.  Two others were injured.  No further information is available.
Several petrol bombs were thrown at the home of Denis Bradley, the vice-chairman of the Policing Board, in Londonderry.  Bradley's wife and teenaged son were home at the time of the attack, but were uninjured.  There have been several attacks against Catholic members of policing partnerships in recent months.  Bradley vows not to quit the policing board because of this incident.
Insurgents launched bold twin assaults on Iraqi security positions in Fallujah, sparking a battle with the police that left twenty-three policemen and four attackers dead and dozens injured. According to local police, about fifteen attackers stormed the police station with rocket-propelled grenades and automatic weapons.
A group calling itself the Nuclei for Promoting Total Catastrophe claimed responsibility for setting a mobile library, which belongs to the Regional Union of Municipalities and Communities of the Ioannina Prefect, on fire.  The library was damaged but not destroyed in the attack.  In their claim of responsibility, the group writes, The education system is operating according to the system's guidelines.  Education and culture churn out only miserable extras in this theater of absurdity.  Our sole demand is the total destruction of the system.  Our fire will burn until we walk on its rubble.
The Kuwaiti NGO, National Committee for POWs and Missing People's Affairs, stated that one of the NGO's teams had been attacked by a bomb planted on one of the main roads leading to a mass grave being dug up. The attack resulted in only minor injuries to one team member and property damage.
Four bricks were thrown into the home of Jane Crudden, a 105-year-old woman, in the Oldpark area of north Belfast.  Crudden's grandson, who was home at the time of the attack, was cut by shards of glass.  Authorities say this incident may be sectarian.
A small bomb exploded at the home of the chairman of the Ecuadorian Supreme Electoral Court,  Nicanor Moscosol. The bomb damaged Moscoso's wife's car, but no one was injured.  The motive for the attack is unknown.
Jose Gabino Rodriguez, the mayor of Berbeo, was attacked during a community meeting.  Rodriguez what shot three times, but survived and was reported in serious condition at a local hospital.  Two other people attending the meeting were also wounded by the gunfire, one, a woman, died.
A landmine was planted on the side of a busy road between Urus-Martan and Alkhan-Yurt. The bomb was supposed to be detonated by a clock mechanism and had a hidden hand grenade inside. The device was defused just minutes before it was supposed to explode.
A suicide bomber killed himself and eight other passengers on a rush hour bus in Jerusalem, underlining the bitter arguments around the opening of an international court of justice on the legality of Israel's separation barrier. The al-Aqsa Brigades claimed responsibility for the attack and said the bombing was also a reprisal for the Israeli army's killing of fifteen Palestinians in Gaza two weeks before.
A boy was injured in a bomb-like explosion Tuesday outside of a suburban railway station in Mumbai.
One Iraqi civilian and one policeman were injured in an attack at a Kirkuk-Howeija road checkpoint west of Kirkuk.
A tempo (three-wheeler) was gutted when the Maoist-affiliated All Nepal National Independent Students' Union exploded two bombs at a parking lot in front of the Royal Nepal Airline Corporation (RNAC) building.
An explosive device detonated outside a New Democracy (ND) party office in the Neo Psychico area of Athens, only three minutes after a similar device detonated at another ND office in the city.  Only minor damage was caused to the premises.
One police officer was injured when he was hit in the face with a brick.  The attack took place shortly after midnight when the officer was responding to a disturbance where a group of youths were throwing stones at police on the Monagh Bypass in north Belfast.
A prominent writer was attacked when he was returning home from the Bangla Academy book fair on the Dhaka University campus.  He is in a coma.  He wrote a controversial book, which made him a target of Islamic fundmentalists, opposing the Bangladeshi 1971 War of Independence.
The second of two girls' schools was burned in an attack claimed by the Taliban.  The school was located in Sera village of Shaltag.Ref #11,409
Bonifacio Tilocca, the father of the mayor of Burgos, was killed when a bomb exploded outside his apartment in Burgos.  In recent months the mayor has been the target of multiple attacks and threats, including a bombing at his mother's grave in the town's cemetery.  Local authorities have begun raids on the homes of potentials suspects.
Hundreds of Maoist rebels from the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) stormed the telephone tower in Bhopur in the most deadly attack there since the collapse of peace talks in August.  At least twenty-one security personnel were killed.
Two women were caught attempting to plant explosives in a Shiite mosque in the city of Basra.  One of the women was arrested and the other managed to escape with the explosives.  This attack would have taken place on the same day that two other Shiite mosques were destroyed in Baghdad and Karbala.
Unknown perpetrators attacked a school in the Abyan province and tried to set it ablaze in protest against boys and girls being educated together. The suspects are believed to be members of Islamic Jihad.
At least forty-seven people were killed and 130 injured following an attack on a Shia Muslim parade in Quetta.  All of the injured suffered bullet wounds.  Two bodies were found that appeared to be those of bombers who had blown themselves up to avoid arrest.  The Shia were observing Ashoura.  The bombs were reportedly from the group Lashkar-e-Jhangvi.
Two people were seriously wounded in attacks with Katyusha rockets on the home of the deputy police chief in Kirkuk.
A Turkish engineer was killed in an armed attack on the Kabul Kandahar highway.  He was an employee of the Kolin-Nafter construction company.  According to the Interior Ministry the people involved are linked to Mola Ruzi, a former Taliban commander.
A group of unidentified men set fire to a bus shelter in Ban Lae, Than To district, Yala province. Thanks to alert community guards, the attack caused little damage.  Arsonists also set fire to two schools and a health center in the region on the same day.
Police sappers found and defused an explosive device that was left in front of the Justice and Development Party (AKP) office in the Uskudar neighborhood of Istanbul.  The authorities were alerted to the device, that was left in a box in front of the building.
A holiday villa, belonging to a resident of the mainland, was partially destroyed by an explosive charge, in Sante-Lucie-de-Porto-Vecchio.  The home was unoccupied at the time of the attack and there were no injuries caused.  On April 15, the Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC) claimed responsibility for eleven attacks on the island in March and April.  Seven of these attacks were against holiday villas and while this incident is not mentioned specifically, it is likely that it is part of this claim of responsibility.
A letter bomb, packed in a padded envelop, was sent through the mail to Tom McBride, the chairman of the Strabane District Police Partnership (DPP).  Bomb disposal experts were able to safely defuse the device.  This is the most recent in a spate of attacks targeting DPP members.  Police blame the attacks on dissident republicans.
Two suicide bombers blew themselves up outside a Masonic lodge in the Kartal neighborhood of Istanbul, killing one person and injuring five others.  Only one of the bombers died in the attack, the other was seriously wounded.  The attackers began by firing shots with automatic weapons into the Masonic caf, they then detonated their bombs at the entrance to the lodge.  Witnesses claim that one of the bombers chanted Allahu Akbar (God is great) before detonating himself.  This leads police to believe that the attackers may have been Islamic militants.  There is no belief that this attack is connected to larger al Qaeda attacks in Istanbul in December 2003.  By 13 March, authorities had arrested fifteen people in connection with this attack, including two who had received military training in Afghanistan.  CNN reports that the Abu Hafs al-Masri Brigade, the same group that claimed responsibility for the 11 March Madrid train bombings, also claimed responsibility for this incident.  At least two of the attackers, Nihat Dogruel (who died in the attack) and Engin Vural (who was injured) had gone to Chechnya to fight after their training in Pakistan/Afghanistan.
Unidentified perpetrators threw a Molotov cocktail at a van that belongs to the Telefonica company, in San Sebastian.  The device started a fire, which caused damage to the vehicle.  No further information is provided.
Following tips from local residents, police found a homemade explosive device equivalent to 2.5kg of TNT outside of the administrative building of the Selkhoznetkhnila enterprise. The device was placed where a considerable number of civilians have been gathering in preparation for the spring sowing campaign.
191 people were killed and over 600 others injured when ten bombs detonated in four different locations on Madrid's train line.  Three of these bombs detonated in a train that was pulling into the Atocha station, a busy hub for the commuter train line and the metro rail.  It is not reported how many fatalities occurred at each location, but this was the most serious of the bomb sites.  The bombs were detonated by cell phones and were left in backpacks.  At first the Spanish government blamed the separatist group, the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) for the attacks, but later the Abu Hafs al-Masri Brigade claimed responsibility on behalf of Al Qaeda.  By the end of March 2004, authorities had arrested over twenty people in connection with the attack.  The suspects hailed from Morocco, India, Syria and Spain.  In their claim of responsibility, the Abu Hafs al-Masri Brigade says that Spain was targeted because of their cooperation with the US in the war in Iraq.  In response to the attacks, the ruling Spanish party was defeated in elections (which took place four days after the incident) and the new Prime Minister vowed to remove Spanish troops from combat in Iraq.  On 3 April, as the police were closing in on four suspects, including Serjame ben Abdelmajid Fakhet, who they believe was the ringleader in this incident, the suspects blew themselves up in their apartment in Madrid.  This blast also killed a police officer.  One suspect managed to escape the apartment explosion, as he was taking out the trash at the time of the raid.  Abdelmajid Bouchar escaped to Serbia, where he hid out until he was captured in August 2005.
Unknown assailants threw a grenade at the home of Kosovo president Ibrahim Rugova, injuring a security guard. The grenade was thrown into the garden at the house. Police were looking into the incident and had sealed off the president's residence.
Two men, one an elected official of the Municipal People's Assembly, were assassinated by what are suspected to be elements linked to the Salafist Group for Call and Combat (GSPC). According to the local news source, the attackers numbered four.
Two missiles landed near the residence of the governor of Laghman Province.  One missile fell on his land, the other near his residence, killing one man.  It is not clear who is responsible for the attacks.
Ten Israeli civilians and two Palestinians suicide-bombers were killed when they blew themselves up at the southern port of Ashdod. One bomb went off at a citrus fruit packaging factory and the other at an office just outside the perimeter of the port. A cache of grenades was found later hidden in a bag with a false bottom.  Hamas and the al-Aqsa Martyr Brigades claimed joint responsibility for the blasts, stating they were in retaliation for recent members deaths in Jenin.
Unknown attackers assassinated Akkar Nazal al-Someideh, the leader of Kirkuk's Arab community. He was shot dead on his way to work. One of his bodyguards was killed and another seriously wounded.
Three (American) Southern Baptist missionaries working on a water project in Mosul were killed when assailants attacked with automatic weapons and rocket-propelled grenades. A fourth missionary died en route to hospital. A fifth person was critically wounded.
One woman was injured when an explosive device, which had been rigged onto a tricycle and left outside a courthouse, detonated on a southern Philippine island.  The attack took place at the same time several Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG) members were to be arraigned on Jolo Island for various charges.  Authorities are blaming this incident on the ASG, though the group has not claimed responsibility.
An apparent rocket attack killed an Iraqi and wounded five others as Shiite Muslims were leaving a mosque in central Baghdad.
Two ambulances traveling the Medea-Berrouaghia road were ambushed by gunmen, resulting in eight dead and two wounded. The Salafist Group for Call and Combat (GSPC), or one of its local affiliate groups, is suspected in the attack.
A group calling itself the Committee for Promotion of Intransigence claimed responsibility for an explosive attack against the Mercedes-Ioannidhis car agency in Thessaloniki.  The perpetrators threw three explosive devices, consisting of gas canisters and containers of flammable material outside the shop.  The blasts damaged two of the cars parked in the lot.  In their claim of responsibility, the group writes, Early this morning we hit one of the symbols of spectacular misery and consumers' impassive state, the Mercedes agent.
A car bomb was defused outside the headquarters of Delima Marsh insurance company in Medellin.  Until recently the company's president was Jorge Alberto Uribe Echavarria, who took over as Colombia's  Defense Minister when Marta Lucia Ramirez resigned. Authorities reported that a car packed with 25kg of R-1 explosives was defused before it went off.  The car was left in front of the building by a man who claimed he was having mechanical problems and he was going to find a mechanic. It is not known who is responsible for the attack.
Three unknown perpetrators threw a firebomb at the British Council building in Kucukesat, in Ankara Province.  The attack was perpetrated around midnight and no one was injured.  The blast caused minor damage to the sentry box on the premises.
Three utility workers were wounded when they were ambushed by Chechen rebels. The workers were employed under contract in the Achkhoi-Martan district to work on restoration of the Chechen power grid.  The rebels opened fire using grenade launchers on the cars carrying the utility workers. Two police officers were killed when they arrived at the scene to help the utility workers.
Khost airport was hit by three missiles during the morning. No information was provided regarding casualities.
Gunmen shot dead an Iraqi policeman west of Kirkuk. The policeman was killed when three men opened fire with machine guns at a checkpoint.
Unknown perpetrators threw an incendiary device at the front door of the Initiative for Catalonia-Greens (ICV) political party offices in Molins de Rei.  The blast caused a fire, which burned the door of the premises but caused no injuries.
Lohmae Yakoh, the head of a village in Yala Province, was shot dead by suspected Muslim separatists who were riding on a motorcycle.  No further information is provided.
Two explosive devices (most likely hand grenades) were thrown in front of the mosque in Orahova on the anniversary of the mosque being demolished in 1993. The explosion caused two visible holes in the front of the mosque and shattered the glass on one side of the building. The act was likely perpetrated not only to mark the anniversary, but to prevent Bosniaks from returning to the settlement.
Two Finnish businessmen, Seppo Haapanen and Jorma Toronen, who were part of a seven-member trade delegation on a fact finding mission in Iraq were killed when gunmen opened-fire on their vehicle in Baghdad as they traveled to a power plant affiliated with the Ministry of Electricity. Haapanen worked for the Ensto Utility Network Company and Toronen for the electricity consultancy firm Air Lx. Westerners are the frequent target of attack in Iraq, because they are seen as supporting the US occupation with business contracts and supplies.
Surapol Prabpailee, a police officer, was shot four times in the back of the head, and killed.  The attack took place in Yala Province where Prabpailee was directing traffic.  This attack comes amid an increase in separatist violence in recent months.
A homemade explosive device, consisting of a metal tube filled with explosives, detonated in the center of Ajaccio.  The attack took place at a dead end near the Prefecture and at the foot of a residential block.  Authorities believe the intent of the device was only to cause noise and panic.  The blast shattered some glass but caused no injuries.  Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy is due to visit Ajaccio later in the day for a meeting regarding regional elections.
A bomb exploded at an office of the Kathmandu Metropolitan City in Thamel, injuring one person.  This was one of three explosive attacks that took place in Kathmandu on this date.  The Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) are the suspected bombers in all of the attacks.
A foreign security guard and an Iraqi child were killed in a drive-by-shooting outside of Fallujah.  The attack came just after several Iraqi police cadets were shot in a drive-by shooting in Hilla.
Two small bombs were placed in a government building in the Teusquillo neighborhood.  One exploded around 11:30 pm and the other was disarmed by explosive experts.  Authorities are attributing the attack to the Antonio Narino Urban Network of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) because the bombs used were very similar to ones used in previous attacks.
A group calling themselves Anti-Olympic Flame claimed responsibility for an arson attack that took place in Thessaloniki against a vehicle owned by a security company.  The vehicle, which belongs to Zeus Security, was parked in front of the Holy Church of Ayia Triadha.  Material damage was caused to the vehicle and a second car parked nearby.  In their claim of responsibility, the group wrote, We are asking young people to welcome the terrorism of the Olympic Games with a relay race of destruction and arsons against symbols of the state, against the commercial society and every authority.
A bag filled with explosives was found in a train carriage of the Moscow underground. No detonators were present, so the device would have been unable to explode. Officials were investigating the nature and source of the explosives.
A Canadian and a Briton working as security guards for foreign electrical engineers at a power station in Mosul were killed by gunmen in an apparent effort to undermine reconstruction efforts in the city.  The group was attacked as they were in a convoy en route to the station.  Three other British engineers who were traveling in the same convoy were unhurt.
Unknown perpetrators, riding on a motorcycle, threw two explosive devices, described as golf bombs at the headquarters of supporters of President Gloria Arroyo in Metro Manila.  The attack took place at the headquarters of Kaisang Bayan (One Nation) while volunteers were printing up campaigning material.  No one was injured, as the devices only hit the front gate of the premises.
A female suicide bomber detonated near the entrance to the Detskiy Mir (Children's World) shop at the Chorsu market in Tashkent, killing three people, including two police officers and a child.  Another twenty-one people were injured, including eleven police officers.
Eustaquio Picachuri, a miner, detonated a bomb strapped to his body while he was inside the National Congress building. In addition to Picachuri, two security officers were killed and ten people were injured. Reports indicated that Picachuri arrived at the congress building demanding payment for his backed salary.  He then detonated the explosives while two security guards tried to reason with him.  A spokesman for the miner's said that they had decided to adopt several measures to exert pressure on the government but the Picachuri acted on a person decision.
The second of three bombs exploded in the Ward 15 building in Itachhi Tol.  This was part of a series of bomb attacks on offices of the Bhaktapur Municipality that authorities believe were perpetrated by the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M).
Gunmen abducted an Iraqi policeman and shot and wounded a colleague near Kirkuk.  The attack took place in Suleiman Bek, 56 miles south of Kirkuk, when eight gunmen opened fire wounding a policeman. Then they overran the checkpoint and abducted another officer, seizing a police car and fleeing the scene.  This is the first time that a policeman has been abducted in Kirkuk.
Authorities were able to safely defuse two parcel bombs, that were hidden in video cassettes, in a post office in Rome.  The packages were both addressed to the Italian Department of Corrections (DAP).  One of the parcels was addressed to the DAP Director, Giovanni Tinebra and the other to the director of the office of inmates.  Police believe these devices to be the work of anarchists.
Authorities discovered and defused an explosive device that was left on the Madrid to Seville high-speed train railway.  The device was discovered by a railway worker in Villaseca de la Sagra, in Toledo province.  All trains were halted while bomb experts removed the device.  This incident comes only three weeks after ten bombs blew up in Madrid, killing about 200 people.  The BBC reports that a group called the Abu Nayaf al-Afgani, who reportedly claimed responsibility (in addition to a claim by the Abu Hafs al-Masri Brigade, which authorities have found to be authentic) for the 11 March Madrid attacks, also claimed responsibility for this attempted attack.
Francisco Rivera Acevedo, the head of the Aracataca mayor's press office was killed in his home.  Two men apparently broke into his house before shooting him fifteen times and fleeing.  Acevedo was also a local radio announcer, former head of the city's cultural program, and a business owner.  It is unknown what motivated the attack or who carried it out.
An office employee was killed and other injured when a bomb went off at the District Education Office in Dhading district.  The Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) is responsible for the attack.
Iraqi rebels attacked an oil pipeline connecting Basra to the port of Faw. Rebels have repeatedly attacked oil pipelines in Iraq.
A British civilian, Gary Teeley, was kidnapped in Nasiriyah by unknown gunmen as he drove home from the US Airforce Base where he worked. Teeley worked for a Qatari firm based in Nasiriyah in support of coalition forces in Iraq. Teeley was released by his captors one week after his kidnapping, on August 11, 2004. Foreigners who support coalition forces are the frequent target of insurgent attacks in Iraq.
A bomb exploded on the roof of the internal affairs directorate in Khasavyurt. The explosion caused the roof of the building to collapse and shattered windows in neighboring buildings. No injuries occurred.
An explosive device, the second of its kind, detonated in front of Bikash Garments in Kathmandu.  Authorities are blaming the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) for perpetrating both these attacks.
Using two powerful pressure cooker bombs, members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) bombed the election commission office causing structural damage but inflicting no injuries.  This attack took place as the king called for parliamentary elections within one year ro resolve Nepal's political crisis.  The CPN-M opposes the vote.
The Salt Trading Company office building was destroyed after a group of Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) members set off a bomb in the premises.  The building had been constructed with help from the Japanese government.
Khost airport came under rocket attack.  Two rockets landed at the airport in the Takhta Beg area, while three others landed in the vicinity of the airport.
An explosive device detonated in a garbage can opposite a police station in Waeng, in Narathiwat province.  The blast detonated in the evening and damaged a nearby restaurant but caused no injuries.  This attack took place only hours after the United States, Britain and Australia issued warning of possible attacks in southern Thailand.  This was one of two bomb blasts on this evening.
Nicholas Berg, a US citizen who was working as an indepenedent businessman in Iraq, was kidnapped by gunmen in Baghdad.  Berg's headless body had been found on May 8, 2004 in Baghdad. On May 11, 2004 the kidnappers released video showing Berg bound and squatting in front of armed men. Berg was then beheaded in the video which was entitled 'Abu Musab Al-Zarqawi slaughtering an American.'  The attack was claimed by the group loyal to Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, which was known in 2005 as Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn, but went by other names in 2004, including Tawhid and Jihad, which was their name at the time of this attack.
A man was killed and eight others injured when a car exploded near the Carlton Hotel.  Police had established a security area for the music concert of Indian Singer Sonu Nigam.
Gunmen attacked a convoy carrying supplies for coalition forces, killing a Romanian security guard and wounding one other. Both of the Romanian guards worked for the private Bidepa firm that is working under contract with a US security consulting firm in Iraq. The attack occurred in Hillah.  In the wake of the incident, Bidepa announced plans to revise its contract. Foreign security contractors who support the US occupation are the frequent target o insurgent attack.
Members of the Communist Party of Nepal- Maoists (CPN-M) killed an elderly man, after he spoke out against Maoist atrocities.  He was beaten to death.
A French television journalist and his cameraman were kidnapped while taping a US military convoy under attack.  The two men disappeared south of Baghdad and were kidnapped and released seperately from each other after they were seperated after fleeing for cover in different directions.  The camerman was picked up by a group of Sunni fighters and released when he convinced them he was French. France opposed the war and has no troops in the occupation.  The cameraman was released the same day he was captured and the journalist was released on 14 April.
A police chief and nine of his boduguards were killed by Taliban fighters as they were traveling through Kandahar's Chinarto district.  The general area of the attacks -- Zabul -- is considered a stronghold of the Taliban.
Two rockets were fired at Garhi Ata Mohammed village, on Kohat Road, about 5 km from Peshawar.  One rocket fell in a field and the other near a brick kiln closer to the center.
A Jordanian attacker fired on a convoy of three vehicles with mostly US prison officers as it left a prison in northern Kosovo. All of the police officers were members of the UN peacekeeping force. Two American police (both females) and the Jordanian attacker were killed and 10 American officers along with one Australian were injured. Four other Jordanian officers who were on duty are being held in UN custody. Several sources noted that the attack was motivated by the current situation in the Middle East. Others noted that there may have been a link to al-Qai'ida.
A train carrying oil products came under fire in Chechnya. The train was stopped because two cars caught fire.
A parcel bomb was delivered to the east Belfast office of Peter Robinson, the deputy leader of the Democratic Unionist party.  The device, which didn't detonate, was opened by Robinson's daughter.  This is one of two parcel bomb attacks in Northern Ireland on this day.
A holiday villa, which belongs to a family from Paris, was completely destroyed by a high-powered explosive charge in the Haute-Corse department on the island of Corsica.  This was one of two explosive attacks that took place within fifteen minutes of each other in Haute-Corse.
The Earth Liberation Front (ELF) is suspected of setting fire to three luxury homes in Snohomish, Washington, that caused about $1 million in damages.  The perpetrators targeted new homes located in a golf course subdivision.  A spokesman for the ELF said that they believe that one of their members perpetrated the attack but were not completely certain.
Suicide attackers detonated five simultaneous car bombs against police buildings during morning rush hour killing sixty-eight people and wounding up to 200 people. Five of the injured died overnight from their wounds bringing the death toll up to seventy-three.  These are the largest attacks to hit Basra, a mainly Shite city, since the US-led occupation began one year ago.
A village leader from Narathiwat Province, was shot and killed by unknown gunmen on a motorcycle.  The attack took place as the leader was traveling with his family.  This is one of many seemingly coordinated incidents in southern Thailand on this evening.  Eleven schools, twenty-four phone booths and many other premises were torched.
An office of the Tambon Administration Organization was set ablaze in Sungai Padi by suspected separatists.  This was one of over fifty arson attacks that took place in southern Thailand on this evening.  Authorities believe the attacks were coordinated.
Two people were killed when a bomb planted in a garbage truck exploded.  One other person was injured in this attack, which takes place during elections and militants have warned people to stay away from the election and voting.
A United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) office was attacked in Konduz by unidentified men. There were no injuries or casualties.
An office that houses the UN was set ablaze as part of a series of clashes between Muslims and Christians in Moluccas, in Ambon Province.  Four cars that belong to the UN were also set on fire.  Overall, the clashes killed fourteen people and left over 100 injured.  It took authorities two hours to get the situation under control in the area.  This is the bloodiest day in Indonesia since a pact between Muslims and Christians was signed in 2002.
Ethnic separatists shot two Hindu nationalists, killing them on the eve of national elections.  One of the victims was a relative of a Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) member and militants had threatened anyone having ties to the BJP.
Five people were injured when a grenade was thrown at a government building in Srinagar.  Radicals have warned people to stay away from the election and voting.
An agricultural shed in Tallone, which belongs to a farmer, was slightly damaged by a small explosive charge.  This same farmer had been targeted in a similar attack in October of 1999.  The Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC) claimed responsibility for this attack on 13 May 2004.  In their statement, the group writes, the fight for liberation of the Corsican people must continue.  This was one of six attacks the group claimed.
A pipe bomb was thrown into a home in County Down that was occupied by a couple and their young grandson.  The attack took place at the home, which is in Breezemount Rise in the mainly loyalist Breezemount estate of Conlig, outside of Bangor.  The device landed on the roof of a shed, where it detonated and caused slight damage to the house.  Authorities believe that the device was thrown from a back alley behind the home.
Several explosive devices detonated at the Workers' Commissions (CCOO) offices in Gijon, in northern Spain.  The perpetrators forced open the doors of the premises and placed the devices on each of the building's four floors.  The blasts damaged furniture, shattered windows and also damaged the offices of the General Confederation of Labour (CGT).  No further information on perpetrator or motive was available.
An explosive device went off on the Nazran-Orzhonikidze highway as the vehicle carrying staff from the Russian Interior Ministry passed by. No one was injured in the attack. The last was equivalent to 500g TNT.
Two crude bombs went off near the police station at Dainik Bangla.  This was one in a series of bomb attacks that took place during an anti-government protest that was being led in Dhaka by the Awami League party.
A bomb was tossed at Motijheel Shapla Chattar, but no one was injured in the blast.  This was one in a series of bomb blasts that took place during an anti-government protest by the Awami League (AL) in Dhaka.
Insurgents attacked a convoy of foreign contractors returning to Kuwait after delivering supplies for the US contractor Kellog Brown and Root (KBR) in Iraq, killing a Filipino worker and two Ukrainians. The attack, which occurred in Abdali,  involved a roadside bomb and RPG fire. The Filipino was identified as Rodrigo Reyes, employed by the First Kuwait Trading company, a subsidiary of KBR. The Ukrainians were not identified. Foreign contractors who work with US forces in Iraq are the frequent target of attack in Iraq.
Suspected Islamic separatists fired three rounds of M-79 rockets at a Thai security post in the border town of Thanto, in Yala Province.  No one was injured by the rockets but one police officer was wounded as he attempted to chase the attackers.  Islamic separatists have increased their attacks in southern Thailand since January when they burned twenty-one schools in one night.
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) guerillas shot and killed Federico Hermosa Lozada, municipal counselor in Rivera (Huila department). Reports indicate that Hermosa was shot at point blank range by several guerillas.  It was also reported that pamphlets threatening other civic leaders in the region were found at the scene.
A group of Maoists from the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) beat and left Jagat Bahadur Bhandrai of Narethani VDC-4 Baglung District with broken legs.  No further information is available.
A hand grenade was thrown at the home of Nicos Anastassiades, the main Greek Cypriot opposition leader, in Limassol.  The blast caused slight damage to the building but there were no reported injuries.  This attack comes only a week after Greek Cypriots voted no in a referendum on whether to approve a UN plan to reunify north and south Cyprus.  Anastassiades had encouraged voters to vote yes.  The Cypriot Nationalist Organization (OKE) claimed responsibility for this attack and issued a new threat to the traitor Anastassiades.  In their statement, the group writes, we are sorry the president of DISY has no feelings whatsoever.  Does he not care about his country or members of his family?
A pizzeria was completely destroyed by an explosive device in Biguglia, in Haute-Corse department.  The device consisted of a fire extinguisher, filled with explosive substance.  It was placed at the front door of the restaurant in the middle of the night, where it detonated.  There were no reported injuries.  The group, Clandestini Corsi, claimed responsibility for this attack on 29 May.
An explosive device detonated outside of a Russian restaurant, near a pagoda along the Mekong River.  There were no reported injuries.  The Laotian government denies that this took place but international authorities believe it could be the work of small bands of mainly Hmong rebels, who have been waging a low-level insurgency for over thirty years.
Four Iraqi policeman were killed and another wounded in Mosul when a bomb was detonated as their patrol was passing by. Gunfire was exchanged but the attackers escaped.
Fifteen passengers were killed when members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) opened fire on a civilian bus.  Among those killed were seven soldiers and one police officer.  The attack was condemned by human rights groups.
A bomb exploded in the Dynamo stadium in the Chechen capital, Groznyy, killing the republic's president Akhmad Kadyrov. Kadyrov was elected last fall in what was considered by many to be a fraudulent vote. The explosion was caused by a bomb planted inside a concrete pillar and occurred at 10:35am during a parade and concert in Groznyy celebrating the 59th anniversary of the victory of Germany in World War 2. The blast tore a hole in the section designate for dignitaries. It was not clear if the explosion was specifically targeting Kadyrov or whether it would have occurred regardless of his presence, as he was not officially scheduled to be at this event.  Khussein Isayev, chairman of the Republic's state council, and Adlan Khasanov, a reported for Reuters, were also killed in the blast. Col. Gen. Valery Baranov, the commander of the Russian military in the northern Caucasus was gravely wounded. Although estimates of total casualties varied, at least ten people were killed and around fifty more injured. These numbers include many civilians and WW2 veterans who were also attending the celebrations.  Officials believe that the blast was detonated by remote control and was intentionally installed below the VIP section. The bomb may have been planted some time ago during the recent renovations to the stadium. Preliminary reports suggest that the bomb was equivalent to one ton of TNT. The location of the bomb made it impossible for existing equipment to detect.  The type of explosive appeared identical to the type used to blow up the military parade two years ago in the Dagestani city of Kaspiysk. Rescue workers prevented two other blasts in the stadium. They were able to defuse another landmine and an additional explosive device equipped with a timer set to go off 30 minutes after the first explosion.  On May 12, another explosive device was found in the half-ruined Dynamo Stadium. The device consisted of TNT charges and pieces of metal. It was unclear if the device had been planted recently or a long time ago.  Rebel leader Shamil Basayev claimed that he was involved in and had organized the blast. The attack may have been intended to sow panic and disorder among the Chechen leadership. Initial investigations were focusing on the security staff at the stadium and the builders who took part in the renovations of the stadium. Investigators believe that insufficient training and organization of the security staff was faulted for allowing the attack to occur. Officials had detained at least five individuals for potential involvement in the attack, including Ibragim Musayev, who was also involved in the hostage-taking raid of the Dubrovka Theatre and the bomb attack near a McDonald's in Moscow. Investigators had also given a more specific list of suspects who were under investigation to the Russian Duma.  The Russian appointed Prime Minister, Sergei Abramov will serve as President until new elections are held sometime before September, as stipulated by the republic's constitution. The attack serves a blow to Putin and his strategy for ending the conflict in Chechnya.On August 5, Interfax reported that three suspects had been arrested in connection with the attack, two of whom had already confessed to the crime. The third man was arrested later than the other two and was providing investigators with useful information.
An explosive device detonated in the Four Seasons Hotel in Baghdad as it is frequented by contracts and foreigners. The attack wounded two British nationals, two Nepalese, and two Iraqis, all security guards at the hotel. Foreign contractors in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
An attack caused damage to an oil pipeline in the al-Faw area of southern Iraq causing a large drop in southern oil exports.  Pipelines have been targets of insurgents regularly during the US-led occupation.
Police explosives experts safely detonated a bomb that was discovered in Algeciras.  The bomb was left in front of a children's home one block from the local police station.  Authorities believe the Revolutionary Forces of Colombia (FARC) were responsible for planting the bomb.
Gunmen attacked three engineers working for an Iraqi reconstructing firm in Kirkuk opening fire on the men in front of their home. The men were identified as a New Zealander, John Tyrrell, an Iraqi, and a South African. Contractors who work on reconstruction projects in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
The Fire Brigade Office in Banke district was bombed in one of six attacks launched throughout Nepal by members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M).  The group has increased its violence recently in a lead-up to a nationwide strike in mid-May.
Two town halls, in northern Philippines, were attacked by unknown gunmen during presidential elections.  The perpetrators set fire to ballot boxes and shot one police officer dead.
A bomb exploded in Kathmandu on the premises of the Revenue Tribunal at Kamal Pokhari. The building was damaged.  This attack, along with a series of others on this evening, was perpetrated by the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M).
In Sarlahi district, the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) torched a local area post office and a forestry office.  This was part of a series of attacks that took place on this evening.  The CPN-M has increased its violent actions recently as a nationwide strike is set to take place within a week.
A powerful explosive device, which contained Power Gel, detonated in a single-story building in Narathiwat Province.  This building was being used for a market, but was closed at the time of the blast.  The market is part of the government's One Tambon, One Product (OTOP) program.  Authorities are blaming local groups who seek to destabilize the government or religious separatists.
Suspected members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) damaged the Annapura Conservation Project Office building of the King Mehendra Trust for Nature Conservation in Besi Sahar after exploding a bomb near the building.  The explosion also damaged a charity called United Mission to Nepal that is located near the site of the blast.
Four alcohol sellers were flogged and then paraded through the streets of Fallujah after failing to remove alcohol from their shops within 48 hours as ordered by Islamic extremists.  Alcohol shops are the frequent target of attacks by extremists who feel that alcohol sales violate Islamic law.Note: Attack date is approximate.
An explosive device detonated outside the gates of a Buddhist temple in Ruesoh, in southern Thailand.  This was one of three explosive attacks against temples in the southern region, all were within an hour of each other.  One person was injured by one of the bombs, but it is unclear in which incident they were wounded.  There was no serious material damage caused.
Two pipe bombs were defused by bomb experts on Doury Road, in Ballymena.  The devices were left outside the home of a Sinn Fein member.  One of the devices was left under the man's car and the other around the side of the house.
The Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) ambushed two vehicles in Northern Uganda, killing seven and injuring another ten in the attacks. Local spokesmen indicated that the dead were primarily students returning for the start of a new semester.
Bomb disposal experts made safe a landmine that was planted by suspected Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) members on the Lice-Kulp road in Lice.  No further information on target is available.
An explosive device detonated at a McDonalds fast food restaurant in the Kadikoy district of Istanbul Province.  The device detonated in the parking lot and caused serious damage to two vehicles, as well as shattered the windows of the McDonalds.  The restaurant had received a bomb warning about fifteen minutes before the blast.  Authorities arrested eight people, who they accuse of planting this device and believe are members of the Turkish Communist Party Marxist-Leninists (TKP-ML).  During operations to capture the suspects, police seized ammonium nitrate, potassium nitrate and other chemicals that could be used to make bombs.
Two sons of a retired security officer were kidnapped and tortured to death.  Militants are believed to be behind the attack.  The assailants allegedly abducted two boys at gunpoint from their home and eventually slit their throats.
A bicycle bomb that was detonated at the Chadoura bridge killed three people and injured twenty-four.  The bomb had been planted by suspected militants on a bicycle parked 20 feet from a border security pillbox.  No group claimed responsibility for the attack, but authorities are blaming Hizbul-Mujahedin.
Another senior Iraqi official was the target of a suicide car bomb which killed at least five people and wounded Abdul-Jabar Youssef al-Sheikhli, deputy inerior minister at his home in Baghdad.  Sheikhli was a member of the Shiite Dawa Party. Four Iraqi policemen and a bystander were killed and twelve other people aside from al-Sheikhli were wounded. This attack comes five days after Ezzedine Salim, the president of the Iraqi Governing Council, was killed by a suicide bomber. He was also a member of the Dawa Party.  Abu Musab al-Zarqawi's group, Tawhid and Jihad later claimed responsibility for this attack.
Three early morning explosions heavily damaged the front of three different banks; Bancomer, Banamex, and Santander Serfin.  Notes were found near the sites of the attacks from a group called Comando Jaramillista Morelense 23 de Mayo.  The notes criticized Mexican President Vicente Fox and the governor of Morelos State Sergio Estrada.  Police also found more undetonated explosives outside of a branch of HSBC. No one was injured in the attacks.
A bomb attack on the anniversary of Eritrean independence killed three and wounded fifty in Barentu [south-western Eritrea]. According to Asmara, the operation was only one of several planned, with the other attacks prevented through intervention by Eritrean security personnel. Eritrean sources fingered foreign-sponsored terrorists, but these accusations were quickly denied by the Ethiopian Ministry of Information.
A car bomb exploded in front of the el Karma hotel in western Baghdad. The hotel is used by many foreignors staying in the capital.
Two bombs exploded near the U.S. Consul General's residence in Karachi.  Suspects riding on a motocycle are believed to have driven by and stuck an item on to one of two cars which later exploded.  The bombs went off in 15-minute intervals.  The group Harkat ul Mujahedin is believed to have been involved.  Two security men who were supposed to be manning their posts on the usually well-guarded street were absent during the attacks.  They were arrested for failing to uphold their duties and are being questioned by the police.
Suspected members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) carried out a series of four bombings on this date.  The first of these occurred at the forestry building on the outskirts of the capital.  Four people were injured by the blast, one seriously.
Several grenades were fired at the Chechen State Council building in Groznyy. Two grenades hit the building between the second and third floors. Broken glass injured two female police officers. The grenades blew up only 15 meters from the office of deputy Russian presidential envoy to the Southern Federal district Oleg Zhidkov who was not injured in the attack.
A bomb was found in a bathroom of the Capilla del Mar Hotel on the tourist strip of Cartegena.  Police were able to disable the device, which contained two kg of explosives, without incident.  It is not known who was responsible for the bomb or what motivated it.
Two Japanese freelance journalists and their Iraqi translator were killed in an attack south of Baghdad. The journalists were returning to the capital from Samawah, south of Baghdad, where they had gone to report on Japanese troops deployed there. Their vehcile burst into flames injuring their Iraqi driver as well.
An Israeli man was stabbed in the back by a Palestinian in the Muslim Quarter of Jerusalem's Old City.  This area of Jerusalem is an emotional flashpoint in the conflict between Israelis and Palestinians.
Two Chechen residents were killed during their attempt to explode an oil pipeline in Ingushetia. The bomb exploded while they were trying to explode the pipeline. Another explosive device was found on the scene and was defused by police. This comes right after a series of attacks on oil pipelines in this region.
A group of unidentified men murdered Oscar Henriquez, candidate for mayor of the Simon Bolivar Municipality.  Henriquez's was shot multiple times after his vehicle was stopped at approximately 11:00 pm.  It is unknown who carried out the attack or what motivated it.
A hired gunman shot and killed journalist and news announcer Alvaro Paul Marquez Polo.  Marquez was the press director for the current mayor's campaign.  It is unknown who carried out the attack or what motivated it.
A rocket hit the home of Education Minister Zobaida Jalal's residence outside of Quetta.  One of her servants died in the attacks.  The minister has been criticized for instituting changes in the Pakistani school system that reduce the influence of fundamentalist Islam and the concept of holy war in the curriculum.
About twenty unknown perpetrators broke into the Lim Ko Nhieo Buddhist shrine in Pattani and broke lamps and threw furniture around.  Authorities believe that this attack was intended to incite conflict between Muslims and Buddhists.  This shrine is next to the Krue Se mosque, where security forces killed thirty-two people in April, inciting a sectarian conflict in southern Thailand that has killed over 100 people.
Militants opened fire on two Americans in Riyadh but no one was injured. The attack took place as the Americans were leaving a residential compound on the Kharj highway. The residential compound used to house US military servicemen but is now occupied by Saudis, other Arab expats and some Westerners.
Ghulam Mohiudin, a worker for the People's Democratic Party was killed when he was shot in the district of Anantnag.  Rebels have historically targeted politicians and parties that participate in the Indian-administered government in Kashmir.
A powerful bomb planted along the wall of a mobile phone shop exploded damaging several buildings nearby, but causing no casualties.
Eight people stormed into a police station in Mussayab, opened fire and killed seven officers before planting explosives to destroy the building. Several polciemen were injured in the attack as well. The assailants wore police uniforms.
Madagascar was the site of multiple attacks in the run-up to its independence day. In Fianarantsoa, a parlimentarian's vehicle was targeted, presumably by a small explosive device. The MP was a member of the I Love Madagsacar ruling party. Other more serious attacks leading to injury were reported in Toliara and Mahajanga.
A British reporter for the BBC was shot and his cameraman was shot to death by unknown assailants in the ultraconservative Suweidi neighborhood of Riyadh.  No group claimed responsibility, but Al Qaeda is the most likely suspect.
A Buddhist teacher, who taught Thai language at an Islamic religious school, was shot and killed in front of 200 of his students in southern Thailand.  This is one of three civilians that were killed on this day, which authorities blame on Muslim separatists.  There has been an increase in sectarian violence in the area, including attacks against civilians in the past three months.
Two students were killed when grenades were thrown at their school.  The Niazyo school is a religious institution.
An explosive device detonated at a bar in Luciana.  The bar belongs to the son-in-law of the mayor of the city, Joseph Galetti.  This blast took place within moments of another at the town hall next door.  On 9 October, three men, Frederic Castelli, Frederic Pereira and Sauveur Cross Ballati, were arrested in connection with this attack and the one next door at the Luciana town hall.
Unknown perpetrators attacked the apartment of the director of the Family Welfare Fund (CAF)'s Corse-du-Sud branch.  Both the weapon used and the means of attack are unclear.  The CAF remained closed for a day to protest the attack.
A powerful explosive device was found and rendered harmless in the building of the Republican Building Committee, a representative of the Chechen Interior Ministry. A staff member of the Committee noted suspicious wires in the basement and called police. The ground bomb with a fuse was defused before it could cause any damage.
Unknown gunmen attacked two police points in Semdinli, in Hakkari Province with long-barreled rifles and rocket launchers.  These stations are located at the exit of the district.  No further information is provided.
An explosive device detonated in Furiani, seriously damaging a warehouse that belongs to Great Casino.  The blast caused the sprinkler system to go off, which weakened the building's ceiling.  The owner of this warehouse was recently placed under formal judicial review for connections with nationalist leader Charles Pieri.
Three crude incendiary devices were left under three different cars in Randalstown.  Two of the devices detonated, causing minor scorch damage to the vehicles and one failed to ignite.  There were no reported injuries.
Gunmen kidnapped and killed a Lebanese man who worked for a construction firm in Iraq. The man was identified as Hussein Ali Alyan. Foreigners who support reconstruction in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
A Pahalgam hotel was the target of a grenade attack, which killed four people, including two tourists.  The grenade triggered the explosion of a gas canister in the hotel's restaurant, which made the explosion more deadly.  Al-Nasireen has claimed responsibility for the attack.  In their claim of responsibility the group states that they hope to discourage obscenity and nudity being imported into the land of Islam's martyrs.
A suicide car bomber killed up to twelve Iraqis, including four policemen, in Baghdad. Police at the scene say they had tried to stop the suspicious vehicle as it hurtled towards an Iraqi military college. thirteen people were wounded as well.
One Iraqi policeman was killed and two others were injured when unknown assailants attacked a police station in Hilla. A number of masked men arrived in three cars and clashed with police using machine guns, moartar rounds and rocket-propelled grenades. The police fled and the attackers burned down the police station.
An improvised explosive device detonated at the Lurgan golf club, damaging the windows and drainpipes at the clubhouse.  The bomb, which contained about 70 pounds of explosives, detonated in the middle of the night so no one was injured.  Authorities are blaming dissident republicans for the attack.
A powerful explosive device detonated on a street lined with several shops, in Sirnak Province.  There were no reported injuries, but major material damage was caused to the shops.  The Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK)- who now call themselves the Kurdistan Democratic Congress (KONGRA-GEL) are active in the area and suspicion about this attack is being cast in their direction.
The head of the Kandahar Refugees Department was killed when unidentified gunmen opened fire on him and his bodyguards.  Three people were also injured in the attack.
Four Afghans, including two children and an elderly man were killed when a remote-detonated bomb exploded as a vehicle used by German peacekeepers was passing by.  One person was wounded.  No group claimed responsibility, but it is most likely that Al Qaeda carried out this attack.
Two Iraqis were killed by a car bomb attack on an electric utility station south of Baghdad. The power plant came under mortar fire before a vehicle exploded at the entrance. Five employees were injured. It marked the fourth attack on the utility in the past three weeks.
Two resonant bombs detonated near a bank branch on Ataturk Street in Izmir Province.  Windows of the building were broken in the attack, but there were no reported injuries.
Reconnaissance units discovered two landmines on the road, planted in close proximity. One was timed to detonate minutes before the other one. Police believe that terrorists hoped to have the second one explode while people gathered around the casualties from the first attack.
A United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) vehicle was destroyed in an attack claimed by the Taliban.  One Afghan guard was also killed and two were wounded.
At least seventy people were injured when a bomb exploded at an Awami League rally in northeastern Bangladesh.  The bomb was placed underneath the platform where lawmaker Suranjit Sengupta spoke.
A branch of an HSBC bank was attacked in Cyprus.  According to sources malicious damage was caused to the bank and authorities were notified not to release any further information to the public.
Three Iraqis were killed and several wounded when a car bomb exploded in a Western suburb of Baghdad. A number of shops and cars were also destroyed in the attack. The attack occurred on the day Iraq's designated new president Ghazi al-Yawer visited the multi-ethnic city of Kirkuk with outgoing US administrator Paul Bremer. It was al-Yawer's first official act in office.
Nineteen people were injured when a grenade was hurled at a security picket at Bijbehara.  The grenade missed its target and caused the large number of injuries.
The fourth of four bombs in Gwadar exploded at an area near a four star hotel.  The explosions went off in rapid succession.  Police say the attacks are meant to create instability in Gwadar.
Four United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) staff were killed in Paktia Province, after a remote-detonated bomb exploded as their vehicle was traveling along a road.  The workers were involved in voter registration.  A group opposed to the US and Afghan government called, Jaish-ul-Muslimin claimed responsibility for the attack in a fax sent to a Peshawar news agency.  It is one of many occurring as the elections approach.
An explosive device, containing over fourteen pounds of highly powerful explosives, was found and safely defused in a parking garage at the Istanbul Airport.  The device had been planted inside a spare tire and was to be detonated by remote control when US President George Bush's plane was landing at the airport.  The bomb was discovered only two days before Bush was due to arrive and only hours before Turkey's prime minister landed to attend a NATO summit.  Turkish and US officials denied all reports about this incident until after the summit was wrapped up, in order to avoid unnecessary panic and possibly to hide their embarrassment of such a large security breach.  Authorities were blaming the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK)- who now call themselves the Kurdistan Democratic Congress (KONGRA-GEL))- for the attempted attack, but the group has denied all responsibility.
Members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) hacked a civilian to death in the VDC-2 (village development committee area) in Dhankuta.
Three Iraqi policemen were killed and another injured following a rocket attack launched by gunmen at a police station in the Habhab area outside of Baqubah.
Two masked attackers threw a Molotov cocktail at the Teksif Union headquarters and OYAK (Army Mutual Aid Association) General Directorate on Ziya Gokalp Boulevard in Ankara.  The attack, which did not cause any damage, occurred soon after the arrival of US President George Bush to Ankara for a NATO summit.
Terrorists of the al-Tawhid wa al-Jihad group kidnapped and threatened to kill three Turkish nationals unless Turkey agrees to remove all of its citizens from Iraq. Turkey has no troops in Iraq but there are Turkish firms working on reconstruction efforts there.  This group already beheaded an American and a South Korean in Iraq and is thought to be behind several suicide attacks in Iraq.  The three victims were released, unharmed on 30 June 2004.
The editor of a local daily was killed in a bomb blast in Khulna.  This is the fifth media member to have been killed since 2001.  He was the editor of the Bangladesh Sangbad Sangstha.
A small explosive device detonated outside the Defense Ministry's fuel oil supply and NATO Pool Installations in Ankara.  The blast shattered windows in surrounding buildings and a number of vehicles parked nearby were damaged.  This attack comes only days after US President Bush visited Ankara and Istanbul to attend a NATO summit.  There have been many similar attacks in the days leading up to his visit.
Three members of an airport cleaning personnel were injured when an explosive device, containing C-4 explosives, detonated on an aircraft at the Ataturk airport in Istanbul.  The plane had just arrived from Izmir Province, on the Aegean coast and was scheduled to fly to Stockholm.  This attack comes in the same week that US President Bush visited Turkey to attend a NATO summit.  There have been a number of attacks all over the country in the ten days prior to his visit.
Members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) exploded a powerful bomb in the office of an NGO -- the Backward Education Society -- that was working to free and rehabilitate bonded workers.  The building was destroyed in the blast.
A business, owned by residents of Northern African descent, was targeted in an attack.  It is unclear what weapon or tactic was used in this attack.  Slight damage was caused to the premises.  On 7 July the group Clandestini Corsi claimed responsibility for this attack and another on a bank owned by Northern Africans.  In their claim of responsibility, the group writes these actions have a precise goal: to stop immigration which has been plaguing the island for far too long already, it is unacceptable that this riffraff gets rich of our land.
Local press is reporting that five Somalis working with a UK NGO specializing in mine-clearing were kidnapped in Northern Somalia. The British organization sponsoring their work, Halo Trust, has been operating in Somalia since 1999. To date, the perpetrators are unknown, however, militia involvement is suspected.
Six police personnel were killed and five injured when militants detonated an improvised explosive device as a convoy was passing by.  The convoy was escorting a member of Parliament.
A rocket hit the Indonesian Embassy in Baghdad, but did not explode.  This attack and three others in Baghdad on this day are being blamed on insurgents who are continuing their campaign against coalition forces, despite a handover of power from the US to Iraq on 28 June.
An oil facility was bombed in Russia's Stavropol territory, causing a fire and causing one of the tanks to pour out oil. The incident was caused by two explosive devices placed under the oil tanks.
An explosive device detonated at the home of an Education Ministry employee in Baghdad.  No information on casualties or damages caused is available.  This attack is the most recent in a spate of bombings targeting officials and low-level workers in the interim Iraqi government.
The Mayor of Helmand Province was seriously injured when his vehicle was blown up by a remote detonated device. The Taliban are suspected in the incident.  The province is a hot-spot for Taliban attacks against government officials.
The Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) claimed responsibility for firing homemade Mustafa rockets at the Neve Deqalim settlement in the southern Gaza Strip.  There were no reported injuries sustained in the blast.  In their communiqu, the group writes, the attack came in response to the round-the-clock crimes carried out by the (Israeli) occupation forces against our people in the West Bank and Gaza.
Alsayeid Mohammed Alsayeid Algarabawi, an Egyptian truck driver, was kidnapped by militants as he drove his fuel truck from Saudi Arabia to US troops in Iraq.  Algarabawi was held by a group calling itself the Iraqi Legitimate Resistance, which demanded that the trucker's company pay $1 million in ransom and never do business in Iraq again.  After the company agreed to leave Iraq, Algarabawi was released on 19 July.  No ransom was ever paid.
Members of the Communist Party of Nepal- Maoists (CPN-M) claimed responsibility for attacks on two officials.  In the first attack, Maoists shot Chairman of Kathmandu Metropolitan City Ward 12 Mahesh Man Shrestha.  He was shot in the chest, neck and abdomen.
A transmitter station in Kagizman, in Kars Province, was blown up.  It is unknown what caused the blast, but authorities are blaming the Kurdistan Worker's Party/Kurdistan Democratic Congress (PKK/KONGRA-GEL), who are active in this area.  The station belongs to Turkish Radio and Television (TRT) and broadcasting was cut off after the blast.
Unknown gunmen opened fire on a police check point in Kirkuk.  The attackers used machine guns to fire on the station.  It is unclear how many officers were wounded by the fire.
Thawil Keowvichit, a former Border Patrol police officer, was shot and killed in Yala Province.  No further information on the attack is available, but authorities believe this is part of an ongoing separatist insurgency taking place in southern Thailand.
The Taliban claimed responsibility for an attack on Afghan election workers who are preparing for the upcoming election.  One woman working for the UN was killed when her vehicle hit a landmine.
The Izz-al-Din al-Qassam Brigades, a Hamas-linked militant group, claimed responsibility for shelling the Sederot settlement near the Gaza Strip.  Two Qassam rockets were fired at the settlement, but there are no mention of casualties.
Gunmen attacked a convoy of Turkish truck drivers who were transporting supplies for US forces, when they opened fire at a fuel tanker truck. Two Turkish drivers were killed in the attack, which occurred near Samarra. Contractors who transport supplies for US forces are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
Hired killers murdered Jesus Maria Zapata, a municipal counselor and local journalist, near his home on Friday. It is unknown who carried out the attack or what motivated. The president of the local counsel claimed that more protection was needed for local officials.
Three liquor stores in Baqouba were destroyed by explosive devices.  One taxi cab driver was killed in one of the blasts.  Liquor stores all over the country have been attacked since the fall of Saddam Hussein by Islamic radicals, who seek to keep alcohol illegal in Iraq.
A section of the pipeline which connects Kirkuk's gas fields with the Beiji power plants in the west, was attacked with an improvised explosive device.  The blast set a section of the pipeline on fire.  This attack comes only five days after another pipeline north of Baghdad was also sabotaged.
The Taliban kidnapped two policemen and injured one other in Shindad town.  The attack took place at a police checkpoint in the town.
The Izz-al-Din al-Qassam Brigades, a Hamas-linked militant group, claimed responsibility for firing a Qassam rocket at the Atzmona settlement.  No information on casualties was available.
A small homemade explosive device, made of firecrackers, was found on a passenger train that was traveling between Basle, Switzerland and Milan, Italy.  Police noticed the suspicious package and were able to safely evacuate the train.  After it was examined, authorities determined that the device would not have caused any harm.
A group of six men attacked a Catholic home in Ballymoney, in County Antrim, with firearms and bats.  The group of attackers entered the home and appeared to be looking for someone specific.  When they realized the intended victim wasn't home, they left and attacked the family's car with baseball bats and fired three shots at the home.  No one was injured.  Authorities are calling this attack sectarian, as it takes place during the twelfth period which is always a time of tensions.
A bomb was found on a roadside in the village of Samashki, near the headquarters for the anti-terrorist operation in the North Caucasus. The landmine appears to be radio-controlled and appears to have been targeted at civilians or a federal convoy approaching the headquarters. Law enforcement officials were investigating.
Sabir Karim, an auditor for the Iraqi Industry Ministry, was shot and killed as he left his office in Baghdad.  Karim is the second auditor working for the Iraqi government to be killed.  Insurgents have been targeting Iraqi officials working for the government, accusing them of being collaborators with US forces.
A small bomb exploded on the street in the Restrepo neighborhood of Bogot.  The bomb was left inside of a box placed near a traffic light.  Police evacuated the area based on a tip and no one was injured.  A small amount of property damage to local buildings was reported.
Two small explosive devices detonated almost simultaneously in the city of Bandung.  The second of the two blasts took place on Cikapundung Street, at the Matahari Building, only about 500 yards from the first blast.   Many believe that the attacks were in response to recent presidential elections, however, the Indonesian government denies all speculation that terrorism was involved.
Two people, including a policeman and a civilian, were killed when suspected Islamic rebels hurled a grenade at a police station.  This attack comes as a Hindu pilgrimage is taking place through southern Kashmir.  Police have been on high alert during this pilgrimage.
A large car bomb detonated in Haditha, in front of a police station and government buildings.  Ten people were killed and twenty-seven other injured by the blast, which authorities believe was targeting the main police station in the city.  Haditha is a former strong-hold of Saddam Hussein and his followers.  Police and security officers have been targeted all over the country and accused of being collaborators with US forces.
Turkish truck driver, Tahir Karaf, was kidnapped while delivering food to US forces in Iraq. Karaf worked for an international transportation firm. It is known that Karaf's convoy was attacked.Note: date is approximate.
United Liberation Forces of Assam (UFLA) militants exploded a grenade and bomb at a telephone exchange.  No further information is available.
A police officer was shot and killed in Kirkuk.  The incident takes place in a city where tensions are high between Arabs, Kurds and Tukomen and many police have been targeted.
A US Protective and Investigative Bureau work force came under attack on the Kabul-Kandahar highway for the first time.  A driver and two Afghan soldiers were killed, as well as one of the perpetrators.  The US national present survived.  The USPI provides security for construction workers.  Taliban members most likely carried out this attack.
The chief of police in Iskandariyah was killed by unidentified militants.  The mode of attack is not specified.  No further information is available.
Two people were killed and two more wounded in an explosion at the Guanlan Movie Theater Square in Shenzhen.  One witness saw a man leave something wrapped in straw next to a garbage can in the square.  Shortly after, the 40-cm metal tube packed with explosives and small steel balls detonated.  Guards speculated the tube may have been filled with a remote-controlled timer.
A female priest was killed and four others injured when unknown gunmen entered the Effata church in Palu, and opened fire after the end of a sermon.  The victim, Reverend Susianti Tinulele was just finishing her sermon when the gunmen entered and started spraying the premises with bullets.  This attack took place near the town of Poso, where some of the worst religious violence has occurred in the last five years.
A group of four unknown attackers shot and killed three people in Raman, Yala Province.  The three victims included two police officers and a railway official from the Ban Maikaen railway station.  A fourth man, also a police officer, was injured in the attack.  Authorities believe that the attack was perpetrated to protest police searches of houses belonging to religious leaders in the area.
The Corsican Revolutionary Armed Forces (formerly the Corsican Revolutionary Armed Front) claimed responsibility for attacking a wine cooperative which is managed by the Cauro mayor, Jacques Bianchetti.  Bianchetti had previously spoken harshly about nationalist movements on the island.  In their statement of claim, the group writes, The serious political situation in which Corsica finds itself prompts us to take radical action at military level.  The group also threatened a renewed fight against the French government.
Sergeant Amaran, a police officer from Yarang, Pattani Province, was shot at by insurgents on a motorcycle.  Amaran was riding his motorcycle home from work, when the assailants opened fire on him, but missed.  Amaran attempted to return fire but also missed and the attackers escaped.
Deputy Chief Minister Mangat Ram Sharma escaped a second attempt on his life when militants threw a bomb at his public meeting in Anantnag.  Five people were killed and around fifty other injured in the attack.
Six foreign truck drivers- two Kenyans, three Indians and an Egyptian- were taken hostage in Iraq.  The group holding them calls themselves The Holders of the Black Banner and is threatening to kill one hostage every 72-hours until the three countries' governments agree to pull all their troops and citizens from Iraq.  None of the three countries is part of the US-led coalition, though Iraqi Prime Minister Allawi asked both Egypt and India to contribute troops in recent days.  The six men were all employees of a Kuwait-based trucking company.  Militant groups have warned that all companies doing business with Americans, would be treated as Americans.  The men were held for eleven days and released unharmed.Note:  The US government says the hostages were released on 1 September and also reports that seven truck drivers were kidnapped.
Arom Buranarak, the chairman of the tambon Bannang Sata municipal council in Yala, was killed by two unidentified attackers, only 500 meters from the Bannang Sata police station.  The perpetrators attacked Buranarak with a machete and hacked him to death.  This was one in a series of attacks in southern Thailand during this week.
Hit men attacked and killed Benedico Caballero, an agrarian leader and Communist Party activist, as he left his job at a farm cooperative.  It is unknown who is responsible for the attack or what motivated it.  Communist Party leaders said the event is additional proof of the persecution the party continually experiences.
Asavapol Dayeem, a defense volunteer who was working with a ranger unit, was shot and killed near a durian orchard in Padungmat, Chanae district, Narathiwat Province.  Dayeem worked for the intelligence staff and was shot three times by the unidentified gunmen.
Two explosive devices were set off on an oil pipeline about twelve miles south of the city of Samarra.  The pipeline stretches from the al-Doura oil refinery in Baghdad all the way to Beiji, 125 miles south.  The amount of damage caused to the pipeline is unknown.
A bomb exploded on a road in Karachi killing one and injuring six.  The targets appeared to be teachers at the Jamiah Rashdiya Islamic seminary, as they were the ones hurt in the blast.  An electrician traveling with them was killed.  The bomb was planted on the road, which is known to be used for passage for seminary teachers.
Police discovered the body of a man who was abducted by militants.  His throat was slit.  The victim was Mushtaq Ahmed, from the Patipora area of Pulwama.
Six children were injured when an anti-tank rocket was fired at a community center in Neve Dekalim.  The rocket was fired from Khan Yunis and came as thousands of people were gathered at the center to protest against the Gaza disengagement plan.  The children were playing in the yard outside of the center when the rocket struck.  The Al-Qassam Brigades, a Hamas-linked militant group, claimed responsibility for the attack.
An explosive device detonated at the Jakarta headquarters of the Indonesian Election Commission office.  No one was injured by the blast, which came just hours before the Commission announced the results of a 5 July poll.
Gunmen shot and killed Col. Musab al-Awadi, the Interior Ministry's deputy chief of tribal affairs, in Baghdad.  Two of al-Awadi's bodyguards were also killed in the attack.  Al-Awadi had to retire from the police force under Saddam Hussein because of his ties to the Shiite Dawa party, but was appointed to his new position after the fall of Saddam.
Four policemen were injured when two unidentified men threw a bomb at a police patrol van.
The antennae of Pakistan Radio in Wana was damaged after a bomb exploded at the building.  The antennae was newly installed and had been transmitting for only a few days.
A bomb exploded at a mosque in Ghanzi Province where voter registration was taking place, killing six people.  Two of the individuals were workers with the Joint Electoral Management Body of the UN.  Seven other voter registration workers were injured in the attack.
Two intelligence officials were killed by a bomb, as they inspected the site where an earlier explosive had detonated.
A number of police officers were wounded when the police center in Al-Taji was attacked by unknown gunmen.  The wounded officers were taken to the hospital.  No further information is available.
Three people, including a suicide bomber, were killed and two more injured in the first of a series of three suicide bombings in Uzbekistan's capital, Tashkent.  The first bombing occurred at about 4:42pm local time at the Israeli Embassy and was carried out by a man 35 to 40 years old.  No Israelis were killed in the attack- all casualties were Uzbekistanis- and the building sustained only minor damage.  Both the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan (IMU) and the lesser-known Jamoat (Society) groups claimed the attacks.  Uzbekistani President Islam Karimov rejected these claims however, blaming instead Hizb-ut-Tahir for the attacks.  The group denies the charge.  The bombers were reportedly all Kazakhstani.The Islamic Jihad Group (IJG) later claimed responsibility for the attack.  Authorities now believe that the IJG was responsible for the three bombings in Tashkent on this day.  IJG has close ties to the IMU and may also be linked to Al Qaeda.
Eight people were killed when the prime minister designate's motorcade was attacked in the village of Jaffar. Dozens were injured in the incident, though two other officials -- Finance Minister Shaukat Aziz and District Nazim (ret) Major Tahir Sadiq Khan -- survived the attack.  Shaukat Aziz, the apparent target, is a Pakistan Muslim League candidate and was in Jaffar to attend a public meeting.  As his driver opened the door of his car, a suicide bomber threw himself at the vehicle causing the blast.  The group, Al-Islambouli Brigades of Al Qaeda, a Qaeda-affiliated group, claimed responsibility for the attack.
Palestinian militants kidnapped three Western church volunteers, one from the US, one from Ireland, and one from Britain, in Nablus. The volunteers work for the Holy Bible Society and were working along with five women who were not kidnapped. The three were released several hours after the kidnapping. The attack was claimed by Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades, a military wing of al-Fatah.The attack is one of several kidnappings of Westerners in Gaza in recent months.
A series of bombs exploded in Gwadar but caused no injuries or fatalities.  The first went off at 6:45 am, at a wall of a police station.  The device was a bottle bomb and was most likely planted by attackers angry over the recruitment of employees from other provinces to work on a port project.
The director of the Lebanese Lara Company, which works in Iraq in construction projects, primarily supplying ready-made house, Vlada Abu Ghadi, was kidnapped. He had received threats prior to the kidnapping that he would be killed if he did not stop his support of Iraqi reconstruction. The attack occurred in Baghdad when gunmen forced the man into a car. Ghadi's driver was kidnapped as well, but released soon after.Foreign contractors who work in support of Iraqi reconstruction and US forces are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
Six bombs blew up churches in Baghdad and Mosul, killing at least twelve people and wounding many more.  Eight people died when one bomb exploded inside a large church in southern Baghdad. The bomb exploded as people were leaving the evening mass.
Six bombs blew up churches in Baghdad and Mosul, killing at least twelve people and wounding many more.  An explosion occurred in a Christian neighborhood in Kirkuk, but no one was injured because everyone was in church.
Gunmen ambushed a Turkish convoy of trucks carrying supplies to US forces near Baghdad. Three Turkish drivers were kidnapped in the attack. The kidnappers later released a video showing one of the hostages being shot to death. The two surviving kidnapped drivers were identified as Abdurrahman Demir and Sait Unurlu. The kidnapping was claimed by the group led by Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, known in 2005 as Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn, but at the time of the attack as Tawhid and Jihad. The group released a video threatening to kill the hostages in 48 hours if the Turkish firm they work for did not stop sending workers into Iraq and supporting US forces. When the Turkish firm agreed to stop operations in Iraq, the two hostages were freed on August 4, 2004.Foreign contractors who work in Iraq supporting US forces are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
An explosion occurred in the Palestinian Authority's central prison in Gaza. Seven Palestinians were wounded when hand grenades were thrown into a cell of suspected Israeli collaborators. IDF forces denied involvement.
A Qassam missile was launched at the Douhal settlement causing heavy damage. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
Gunmen shot and killed a Turkish truck driver who had been transporting supplies for US forces. Osman Alisan was killed near Filfayl Iraq when gunmen opened fire on his truck. Those who work with US forces are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
A truck belonging to Boumerdes University was intercepted and subsequently burned by an unidentified group of terrorists.
Four remote-controlled explosive devices, consisting of about a half a kilogram of explosives, detonated almost simultaneously in Rangae district.  The second of the bombs exploded in front of the Sukhirin district office.  There was no damage caused by the blast.  Authorities believe the attacks were part of an ongoing campaign of violence perpetrated by Islamic separatists.
Three soldiers were injured in a roadside bomb attack as they were preparing to drive teachers to school in Yala province.  The bomb was a remote-detonated explosive and it is unclear if the teachers or the security staff were the intended target of the blast.
Fereydun Jahani, an Iranian diplomat appointed to open a consulate in Karbala, was abducted on the road from Baghdad on 4 August.  He was released unhurt on 27 September.  The Islamic Army in Iraq claimed responsibility for the attack.
Suspected members of the Free Aceh Movement (GAM) shot and killed four civilians and seriously wounded another.  The gunmen opened fire on a car in the North Aceh district, in which the victims were riding.  The victims were local plantation workers and were driving on a road often used by military personnel.
In a drive-by shooting, insurgents fired at a police station in Mosul. No injuries were reported.
A bombing occurred in two movie houses in Sylhet. The explosions were timed to take place about a half hour apart.  A homeless boy was killed and eleven others were injured in the two attacks.  It is impossible to disaggregate the numbers for each individual bomb.
An explosion occurred on an oil pipeline in Hamrin, 20 km aast of Tikrit. The explosion appears to have been caused intentionally and started a fire. The oil pipelines in Iraq have been the target of many recent attacks.
A 13-year-old boy was killed and his brother, who is eight, was injured, when the two boys stepped on an explosive device which was planted on a road near their primary school in the town of Dargecit.  Authorities believe that the bomb was planted by members of the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK), which now calls itself the Democratic Congress of Kurdistan (KONGA-GEL).
Four Lebanese truck drivers were kidnapped on the road between al-Ramadi and Baghdad.
A small explosive device detonated in the coastal town of Ribadesella, in Asturias Province in northern Spain.  The device was targeting a tourist resort in the town and was mentioned in a warning from an unidentified caller.  Authorities are blaming this device and a similar one found at another tourist resort on the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) terrorist group.
Suspected members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) exploded a bomb at the Simrik Air office, causing damage to the building.
The group calling itself the Islamic Army kidnapped Fereidoun Jahani, the Iranian consul in Karbala. The group announced that it was willing to exchange Jahani for more than 500 Iraqi prisoners imprisoned during the Iraqi-Iranian war and since the 1991 Gulf War. The group gave Iran 48 hours to respond before they took 'appropriate action' against the consul.  After negotiations, the hostage was released on September 27 and arrived in Tehran on September 29.
A bomb exploded at a bridge in Medellin moments before a parade of antique cars was scheduled to cross it.  Someone tossed a bomb, composed of on kg of R-1 explosive, off the bridge and onto a pile of rocks.  Thirty-five spectators were injured in the blast, 3 of whom were seriously injured. Most injuries were caused by flying debris.  It is unknown who carried out the attack or what motivated it.  The car show was the closing event at the annual Fair of the Flowers.
A series of mine explosions occurred in Chechnya. One in Argun injured five people when their car rolled over the mine. The attacks occur in the lead up to the Presidential elections and could be an attempt by rebels to destabilize the situation.
A car bomb exploded in front of the house of the Diyala deputy governor. At least one Iraqi was killed and six others were injured. The blast appears to have been targeting the motorcade of the deputy governor.
Unknown perpetrators attempted to use two small explosive devices to blow up large fuel storage tanks in Esenyurt, in Istanbul Province.  The tanks belong to the Demiroren Group facility and no injuries were caused because the devices failed to detonate.  The first of the two devices went off an hour before two blasts at hotels in Istanbul killed two people.  The second went off slightly after the hotel bombings.  A test of the explosive material at the site leads authorities to believe that this attack, and the two hotel attacks were perpetrated by the Kurdistan Workers' Party/Kurdistan Democratic Congress (PKK/KONGRA-GEL).
Three Israelis sustained light wounds when shots were fired at their bus in Samaria. The three appeared to have been wounded by shrapnel.
Two Qassam missiles were fired at the Morag settlement. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
Two local residents, claiming to act on behalf of Chechen warlords, were killed when the explosive device they were planting went off. They were planting the device near a local school in order to destabilize the situation on the eve of the presidential election.
A Qassam rocket was fired at an Israeli community in western Negev. The rocket failed to explode and there were no casualties or damage.
Two Qassam missiles were fired at Nafed Ha'atsar in Gaza Strip. No casualties were reported. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the blast.
A small explosive device, one of two to detonate in northern Spain on this day, exploded outside a Santander Central Hispano bank in Santander.  An unidentified caller warned of the device prior to the explosion, and no one was injured.  Authorities are blaming the attacks on the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA).
An armed group calling itself the Battalion of the Chief Martyr, part of the Brigades of the Mujahideen, claimed responsibility for kidnapping a number of drivers in Iraq. The group said that those drivers were transporting electric equipment and supplies to US forces.
A British journalist, James Brandon, was kidnapped from his hotel in Basra by about twenty men. His kidnappers said that they would kill him if the 'battles' did not stop in 24 hours. He was held for about 20 hours and then released. He suffered minor injuries, including a black eye and bruised face.  A group calling itself Abu al-Abbas claimed responsibility for the kidnapping.
Two Israelis were killed by a Palestinian gunmen near the Jewish settlement of Itamar in the West Bank. The gunmen ambushed the car of the victims as they entered the settlement. Police shot the Palestinian.  The Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade claimed responsibility for the attack.
Bombs exploded at Arbab Ghulam Ali Road area, part of a series of four bombs total that exploded in Quetta.  No further information is provided.
Six bombs went off in Quetta during Independence Day celebrations.  On Saturday, a fourth bomb went off in a residential neighborhood at Patal Bagh.  In the past, the Baloch Liberation Army (BLA) carried out such explosions during Independence Day celebrations.  Following the current series of blasts, an unidentified caller claimed responsibility and said that the attacks were in protest against Punjab rulers' oppression of the Baloch population.
Police Sergeant-Major Poonpichiet Thongchuay was shot and killed by two unidentified gunmen.  Thongchuay was shot three times at a checkpoint in Panare, in Pattani Province.  This attack comes after a group of separatists threatened revenge for the recent arrests of religious teachers and group leaders.
An anarchist group attempted to sabotage the Bologna-Florence train line.  The attack, which included a big metal hook that would drag along behind a train, ripping up the electrical wires, was claimed by a subversive anarchist group.  A train operator spotted the hook and the sabotage was foiled.
Two bombs exploded on a main railway track near the Nawabshah railway station.  The second bomb went off at 8:55 pm, a little distance from where the first explosion took place.  Two men, both police officers, were injured by one of the two blasts, though it is impossible to determine which one.
Two guards were injured after a voter registration center fell under attack in Paktia. The Taliban is being blamed for the attack, as they have vowed to disrupt electoral activities.
An armed group in Iraq, calling itself the Brigades for the Defense of the Holy Shrines, announced that it abducted an Iraqi Intelligence Service officer named Usamah Abd-al-Jabbar. The group released a video of the hostage. The group said they have taken the hostage in response to the fighting in Najaf.
Mortar shells fell on the buildings of the Interior Ministry and Foreign Ministry  in Baghdad, both near the Green Zone, but did not cause any casualties.
An explosive device was found and defused in one of the polling stations to be used in the August 29 presidential elections.
A powerful explosive device was discovered and defused outside a branch of the Military Bank in Tak Bai, in Narathiwat Province.  The bomb was found only a half an hour before it was primed to explode.  Authorities say this was one of the most powerful bombs that has ever been found in the area.  A water cannon had to be used to dismantle the bomb, which was made of ammonium nitrate, nails and a plastic explosive.
Three mortar shells were fired at an Israeli settlement in Qatif Bloc. One fell inside the settlement and the two others fell next to a house but did not explode. One woman went into shock.
A small explosive device, one of two on this day, exploded in the coastal resort town of San Xenxo.  The device had been planted in a trash can, where it detonated, injuring four people, two Portuguese citizens and two Spaniards.  The blast took place after two warning calls were made on behalf of the terrorist group, the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA).  This is the third consecutive weekend that bombs have detonated in northern Spain.  All are suspected to be attributed to ETA.
Three explosive devices detonated within twenty minutes of each other in Yala.  The second blast, which occurred about five minutes after the first, took place in a parking lot behind the My House Hotel, within about twenty meters from the first blast.  The bomb damaged twelve motorcycles and injured three people.  Authorities are blaming the attacks on Muslim insurgents with separatist ideologies.  The device was most likely planted on a motorcycle parked in the lot and was detonated by cell phone.  These incidents occurred five days before Prime Minister Thanksin Shinawatra was due to visit the region.
Militants and remnants of the Ba'th Party attacked the Kurdistan Satellite TV office in Kirkuk with a Katyusha rocket. The attack caused damages to the building, but no casualties.
A senior police officer in Ramadi, Lt. Col. Saad Smayer, was shot by gunmen as he left for work.
The Salafist Group for Call and Combat (GSPC) are suspected in a bomb explosion outside of Boumeredes.  Although the incident occurred in a rural area, the bomb is not believed to be a hold-over from the mining of territory in the 1990s given recent clashes with GSPC elements in nearby villages.
Three mortar shells were fired at the Morag settlement, injuring nine Israelis. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility on their website.
Twelve Nepalese workers were kidnapped when they violated Nepalese law to travel to Iraq to earn money by working as cooks and cleaners for a Jordanian company. The men appear to have been kidnapped by the Army of Ansar al-Sunna Muslim group. The group said that they kidnapped the men because they were cooperating with the occupation.  On September 1, sources reported that the twelve hostages had been beheaded. This set off a wave of riots in Nepal's capital.
Three Macedonian citizens were taken hostage on August 23. They work for the US company Soufan Engineering, with approximately forty other contractors from Macedonia. The men were identified as Dragan Markovic, Zoran Naskovski, and Dalibor Lazarevski.  On October 18, AP reported that the Islamic Army of Iraq had released a video showing two of the hostages being executed. The third hostage was killed soon after. All three bodies had been found and identified.
Gunmen attacked and killed a Turkish oil engineer along with two Iraqis accompanying him, as they left the Baiji oil refinery. Foreigners contractors who work in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attacks, especially those who work in the oil industry, which is a target itself.
The Iraqi minister of education, Sami al-Muzaffar, survived an assassination attempt. An explosive charge was set off near his car, killing two people and wounding three others.
A powerful bomb exploded on a railroad track near Nowshera. The bomb was timed to detonate as a passenger train passed from Quetta bound for Peshawar.  However, the train was delayed and thus, no injuries occurred.
Ali Al-Dhabhawi, the religious advisor to the former Babil governor, and his son, were killed by unidentified gunmen in Al-Hillah.
Three people were killed and six injured when an improvized explosive device planted by the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) blew up a bus.  The victims were an assistant sub-inspector, the driver of the Border Security Forces bus, and the daughter of one of the BSF personnel.  This was one of four explosive attacks that occurred on this day.
A 20-year-old man was kidnapped and beheaded by militants.  He was taken from his house and forced to an isolated fields and killed.  The militants reportedly accused the victim of being an informant before killing him.
A group calling itself the Divine Wrath Brigades claimed an attack on the US and British Embassies and headquarters of the interim Iraqi Government in a mortar attack on the Green Zone. The group released a video showing several group members firing mortars.
A mortar shell was launched at the Morag settlement. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility on their website.
Luis Alberto Zorro, the mayor of Chameza was killed by alleged Revolutionary Armed Forces of Columbia (FARC) guerillas.  The mayor was on his way to a meeting in Villa Nueva when the attack took place.  Diego Leon, a former councilman was also killed but Zorro's son was released.  The motive for the attack is unknown.
Palestinians fired a mortar shell at the settlement of Gush Katif, where it landed on a house. The house was damaged but no casualties were reported.
Police found and defused an explosive device that was planted behind a jetty in La Coruna.  Authorities had been alerted to the bomb by a caller who claimed to represent the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA).  This was one of two explosive attacks that was attributed to ETA on this day and the fourth consecutive weekend that ETA has attempted attacks on tourist destinations.
In a protest against foreign big business, members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) bombed a cosmetic and toiletries company causing considerable damage.  According to police, about fifteen Maoists appeared at the Nepal Lever Public Limited Company and detonated three powerful bombs.  They overpowered the guards and tied them up before entering the factory. Witnesses said the suspects actually planted five or six bombs, but only three went off.  The company is a subsidary of an Indian company which exports millions of dollars worth of toiletries to India each year.
A Kurdish media team, comprising Patriotic Union of Kurdistan Central Media Office reporters and photographers and KurdSat TV correspondents and cameramen, were the target of a terrorist attack. A terrorist blew himself and his car up attempting to block the path of the media teams' car when they reached a checkpoint between Arbil and Mosul. The terrorist attack is believed to have been targeted at the head of the PUK organization. Only minor damage was caused to a nearby car.
Ten people were killed in a bomb attack on the US security firm, Dyncorp, in Kabul.  Three Americans, three Afghan nationals, and three Nepalese citizens died in the attack.  Dyncorp provides security for Karzai, and is also located near a UN guest house.  Numerous others were wounded and dozens of shops and buildings were damaged or destroyed.  The bomb was apparently placed in a car and exploded by a remote device.  In January 2005, an Afghan judge was arrested in connection with this attack.  Authorities who were searching the judge's house, found explosives.  The Taliban is reportedly responsible for this attack.
An oil pipeline was blown up and set on fire in the Al-Rumaylah oil field in Southern Iraq. The pipeline is owned by the South Oil Company. Eight pipelines in the same area were blown up and destroyed three days ago.
At least three Palestinians were killed and others wounded at a demonstration at the  Ayn-al-Hulwah Camp in Lebanon.  Gunmen opened fire on the demonstrators, who were gathered in support of Palestinianprisoners who went on a hunger strike in Israeli jails.  The demonstration had been organized by the Palestinian Liberation Organization and Fatah movement. Several people had been arrested in connection with the shooting. Among the dead was Abu Hijaa, a Fatah official.  Authorities believe that the attack was the work of a Sunni Palestinian fundamentalist group, which calls themselves, Jund Al Sham (Soldiers of Damascus).  This group has been at odds with the Fatah loyalists at the camp in recent times.
A pipe bomb detonated in the front garden of a home on Maryville Drive in Bainbridge.  The blast shattered a window of the home, but there were no reported injuries.
Unidentified persons appear to have fired rockets on three different police buildings that were under construction.  One was explosion took place in Sanhori.
Coordinated Attack - see Incident ID 19448.A pamphlet bomb exploded at a branch of BBVA Banco Fances bank in Buenos Aires.  The explosion took place hours before a visit by Rodrigo Rato, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) Managing Director, who was scheduled to meet with Argentine president Nestor Kirchner.  The bomb was detonated by a previously unknown group calling itself the Dario Santillan Command.  Pamphlets found at the location of the attack called for Argentina to default on foreign debt payments and for the IMF chief to leave the country. No one was injured in the blast which caused minimal structural damage. A similar explosion took place outside of a McDonalds restaurant shortly after the first explosion.
Two buses near the Beersheba municipality building were blown up by a suicide bomber. The suicide bomber took advantage of the fact that the two buses were standing together. He blew up a bomb on one bus and then exploded a second bomb on the second bus. At least fifteen people were killed and around eighty-five injured. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack, saying that it as a response to the assassination of Yasin, a leading Hamas official.
A police patrol was attacked by grenades in south Baghdad. One officer was killed and two wounded in the attack.
A highway police patrol was attacked between Kandahar City and Shahr-e-Safa.  Police blame the Taliban for the assault.
A low-powered explosive device detonated in the Bogor Indah Plaza (BIP) in Bogor City.  The device was made up of fire crackers, a timer and batteries.  Authorities also found a newspaper, which could have been used to light the firecracker, a cable and a lighter at the scene of the attack.  No further information is available.
Loyalists from the Ulster Defense Association (UDA) are being blamed for an attack on a bar in north Belfast.  The perpetrator stole a forklift digger from a nearby construction site, drove the vehicle through the front window of the bar and threw three petrol bombs inside.  Fire officers were able to extinguish the flames before any major damage was caused.
A mortar shell fell in Netzarim, in Gaza Strip. No one was hurt and no damaged was caused.
Several mortars exploded in downtown Baghdad, near the Green Zone convention center where the Iraqi National Assembly is meeting to choose deputies to the speaker and to vote on bylaws.
An explosive device detonated at the side entrance to the education office at the Corsican Academy, in the city of Ajaccio.  The blast destroyed the entrance, but caused no injuries.  This attack comes one week after another explosive device was left outside the same entrance, but failed to detonate.  On 14 November a group calling itself the 'Army of the Corsican People' claimed responsibility for this attack and three others.  On 8 December, the Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC)- Union of Combatants, claimed responsibility for this and seven other attacks.  In their statement of claim they acknowledged that another group had already claimed the attack, but stated that it was erroneously claimed by others.
One person, who was attempting to hang a banner with a bomb attached to it, was injured when the device detonated prematurely.  The victim is reportedly a member of the Marxist Leninist Communist Party (MLKP) and was injured in the hand.  The incident took place in the city of Izmir.
Unidentified men set fire to the Ban Ja Kua School only minutes after setting fire to the Ban Ton Sae School.  Both schools are in Raman, in Yala Province and are a short distance from each other.  The fire caused slight damage to the school but there were no reported injuries.
A police officer and a guard were killed when unknown perpetrators opened fire on a police checkpoint in the city of Diyarbakir.  The attack took place at a checkpoint on the highway between Diyarbakir and Sanliurfa.  This incident takes place as EU Commissioner, Gunther Verheugen was in the city to meet with Diyarbakir Governor Nusrey Miroglu and Mayor Osman Baydemir.
A rocket was fired at the Sederot settlement. One person sustained slight injuries. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
The Real Irish Republican Army (RIRA) claimed responsibility for carrying out an armed attack on construction workers in Londonderry, who were building a police station.  The RIRA gunmen fired up to thirty shots at the workers, from an AK47 rifle.  Several cars and buildings were hit by bullets, but no one was injured.
Three mortar shells were fired at the Neve Deqalim settlement. One women suffered from shock when one of the shells hit her house.  The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
Nine people and at least one suicide bomber were killed when a large car bomb detonated outside the Australian Embassy in Jakarta.  Over 180 others were injured by the blast.  No Australians were killed by the bomb, which authorities blame on the Jemaah Islamiyah (JI).  It is uncertain if the group claimed responsibility for the attack or not.  The blast shattered the windows in seven nearby buildings and left a large crater in the pavement.  Authorities found traces of TNT and sulfate at the scene, the same materials that were used in the Marriott Hotel bombing in October 2002 and the Bali nightclub bombings.  On 17 September, police made their first arrest in this case.  They took into custody a man who they believe to have transporting the explosives used in this attack.  On 1 October, authorities identified the suicide bomber as Heri Golun, based on DNA tests done at the scene.  On 24 November, police announced that they had arrested four more suspects in connection with this attack.  The four men were identified as Iwan Darmawan (alias Rois), Hassan, Apuy and Sogir (alias Ansori).
One of five rockets landed near the International Security Assistance Forces (ISAF) compound.  This was one of a series of five rocket attacks on this evening that are being blamed on the Taliban and Al Qaeda.
Three Lebanese workers in Iraq were killed and one wounded by a group of gunmen. The three killed are identified as Gebrane Badine, Karim Khoury, and Khoury's wife Evelyne Abou Dib. The fourth Lebanese was identified as Khukri Nmeir. All the victims were working in food exports in Iraq and were killed in Khoury's home.
Two people were killed and three others wounded when a road-side explosive charge went off near the offices of the US Embassy in Basra.
The Taliban have allegedly killed two local tribal leaders who supported Afghan elections.  The two bodies were found on 18 September.  The tribal leaders had participated in the campaign.Note:  Incident date is approximate.
A column of vehicles carrying foreigners, most of whom are believed to be Americans, came under attack at the entrance of Airport Street. The attack led to the destruction of the three vehicles.  One of the vehicles was carrying Iraqi National Guard forces. Casualty numbers were unavailable.
Two oil workers were injured  in a drive-by shooting west of Kirkuk. Oil pipelines and workers are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
Two Hadith missiles were fired at Kfar Darom settlement in Gaza. There were no casualties in the attack. Fatah claimed responsibility.
Two petrol bombs were thrown at the home of Pat Ramsey, a SDLP assembly member from Londonderry.  The bombs were thrown near Ramsey's youngest daughter's window, where they exploded.  The entire family was home at the time of the attack, but no one was injured.  Ramsey says this is the eighth time his home has been attacked by explosive devices.
Nineteen mortar shells were fired at Qatif settlements. No one was hurt.
Twelve Kurdish police officers were killed and two were injured on their way to join a training course in Jordan. Abu musab al-Zarquawi's group, now known as Tanzim Qa'idat Al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn, claimed responsibility for the attack.
In Baqubah, gunmen in two cars opened fire on a van carrying policemen, killing eleven police officers and one civilian.
A van, which belongs to a member of the Basque police force, was totally burned out by an attack in Ventas de Armentia.  The blaze was started by an incendiary device, which was left inside the vehicle.
Muhammed Yusuf Ra'd, a Lebanese national, was kidnapped by unknown assailants in al-Ramadi on an unknown date in September 2004.  He was working as a truck driver for the Iraqi Army.  He was staying in a hotel in al-Ramadi when three Iraqis arrived in a car in the middle of the night and took him to Fallujah, where he was kept without food or water for six days and beaten.  He then reports he was abducted by another group from Al-Ramadi, taken to a new location in Samarra then to Turaybil, where he was forced to watch as an Egyptian was beheaded.  Eighteen days later, he was handed over to the Lebanese embassy in Baghdad.
An attack on a power junction caused a blackout in Baghdad. Officials were working to repair the damage.
A group calling itself Jaysh Ansar al-Sunnah executed three Iraqi truck drivers after they admitted that they were involved in transporting supplies to US army camps. The group also stated that the trucker's trucks would be destroyed along with the supplies.
A police patrol in Baqubah was hit by an explosive device that wounded four police officers and a civilian.
Five mortar shells were fired at the Morag settlement. There were no casualties. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
Naya Sema, an Imam at Ban Bunae Tungoh Mosque was shot and killed by unknown gunmen in Pattani Province.  This is the most recent attack in an ongoing insurgency in southern Thailand that began in January 2004.
Three mortar shells were fired on the Neve Deqalim settlement. Hamas claimed responsibility.
The Tulio Varon Front of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) shot and killed Luis Eduardo Duque Varon, Antonio Jose Duque Varon, and Alfonso Lopez Nivia on a rural sector of El Libano municipality. A sign was left near the bodies which read Death to 'para stool pigeons. The sign was a reference to the victims alleged involvement with the Self-Defense Forces of Columbia (AUC) which may have motivated the attack.
Police were able to safely defuse an explosive device that was found placed under a traffic police box in the town of Betong.  The device was made of PVC pipe stuffed with 1 kilogram of urea fertilizer and power gel explosive, which was connected to a fuse and a mobile phone circuit panel.  The device was found at Lian Yu intersection in Sukhayang road, where it was spotted by passers-by.  Authorities believe the intent was to kill police officers who reported to traffic duty.
The website of Hamas's military wing calimed responsibility for shelling Kfar Darom with three mortars.
A politician who favors Indian rule, Mohammed Ibrahim, was killed in Kashmir when he was shot by suspected militants.  No further information is available.
A car bomb detonated in Mosul killing all three people in the car and a bystander. Several other people were injured in the attack and nearby houses were damaged.  Authorities believe that the victims were insurgents who were planning to carry out a suicide attack in the area, when their bomb detonated prematurely.  The intended target of the suicide attack is unknown.
A Qassam rocket landed in Sederot. No one was hurt and no damage was caused. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
Nine employees of the NGO Afghan Aid were attacked by a group of about thirty suspected members of the Taliban.  Staff members were beaten during the assault, and office equipment and vehicles were stolen and vandalized.  The attackers also tried to burn down the election office building.  The Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack.
One police officer was injured when unknown gunmen opened fire at a police station in Cemizgezek, in Tunceli Province.  The attackers fired long-range weapons and rocket launchers at the station.  No one was arrested in connection with the attack.
Gunmen attacked a convoy of official cars near Samarra to the North of Baghdad. A source in the Iraqi National Guard said that one of the cars was damaged and its driver was killed. Another occupant of the car was wounded.
Kowit Suebpradit, a deputy principal at Ban Koh Poh School in Pattani's Nong Chick district, was shot by motorcycle gunmen as he drove to work. He was reported in stable condition.
Unidentified men on motorcycles, threw two Molotov cocktails at the home of Anuwat Supasri, the assistant chief of Ranong's Muang district.  The first device landed on the second-floor balcony but failed to detonate and the second device landed under the family's car, where it detonated, causing a blaze.  No one was home at the time of the attack.
Gunmen blew up an oil pipeline that extends from Kirkuk to Baghdad. The pipeline feed the Al-Dawrah Refinery in southeastern Baghdad. Oil pipelines have been the target of attacks since the start of the US occupation.
A member of the Iraqi National Council, Shaykh Abd-al-Karim al-Muhammadawi, survived an assassination attempt when gunmen opened fire on him.
Palestinians fired two mortars at a Jewish settlement in the Gaza Strip, killing an Israeli American woman and injuring one other settler. Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
The Italian Embassy in Baghdad was the target of a mortar shelling. Six mortars fell on the periphery of the embassy. There were no casualties. However, several nearby houses were damaged by the shelling. The attack comes amid much reported about the Italian hostages.
A 45-year-old French citizen, Laurent Barbot, was shot while driving his car near a supermarket, by unknown assailants.  He was an employee of the French electronic group, Thales working as a technician at a nearby naval base.  No group claimed responsibility, though some believe Al-Qaeda was responsible.
Six Iraqis who had just signed up to join the National Guard were killed at a makeshift recruiting center in western Baghdad. Gunmen in a car with a machine gun opened fire on the group as they emerged from the recruiting center.
An explosive device, the second of its kind supposedly planted by the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA), was found on an electricity pylon in the Pyrenean Bujaruelo valley.  The perpetrators planted four separate charges, one at each of the feet of the pylon.  Two detonated and the other two were defused by authorities.  This was the second device that an ETA caller warned about in a call to a local newspaper on 25 September.  The group later claimed responsibility for planting the device.
One Chechen judge was killed and another wounded in by Chechen mojahedin in an operation code-named don't judge the mojahedin and you will not be judged yourself.' The judges work in Groznyy, where the incident took place. The mojahedin claim that they are punishing the judges for betraying Islam and their people
A South African engineer was killed and a British national seriously injured in an attack by armed insurgents outside the Iraqi national Oil Company in Kurkuk.  An Iraqi driver was also killed.
Two individuals were killed when a makeshift bomb they were trying to plant exploded. One of the men had been identified as Mairbek Ilyasov, who had been on the federal most wanted list for a long time. There is some evidence that Ilyasov was involved in other attacks in Chechnya as well.
Carlos Hipolito Miralda Roca, National Union for Hope (UNE) party deputy, and UNE assistant Eduardo de Jesus Moreno Alvarez were both shot and killed by an unknown assailant.  The two were driving to Guatemala City for a meeting when the attack took place.  It is unknown who carried out the attack or what motivated it. However, it was reported that no robbery took place which led authorities to believe that the attack may have had a political motive.
A bomb exploded in a bank, but caused no casualties. Many establishments were closed on the day of the blast, because of a two-day national strike called by the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M).  Several houses in the area were damaged.
A resonant bomb was planted in the garden of the Turkish American Association (TAA) in Istanbul, where it detonated.  The blast caused damage to the TAA premises, but there were no reported injuries.
Three UN volunteers stationed in Hebron were attacked by Israeli settlers carrying iron chains and baseball bats while they wee escorting Palestinian children to school in Tuba. The victims were identified as Kim Lamberty and a man named Chris Brown, both Americans. Diane Jenson, also an American, was present but not attacked. The attack occurred near the settlement of Maon.
Two Lebanese employees of the Lebanese electrical company Jubaili Bros, Marwan Ibrahim Qassar and Mohammed Jawdat Hussein, were kidnapped in Baghdad by the Islamic Army of Iraq, along with six Iraqis and two Indonesian women.  The hostages called for the Jubaili to suspend all operations in Iraq; in fact, all operations had been suspended in June 2004, but the two Lebanese workers were sent to train customers how to operate equipment.  They remain hostages.
Law enforcement forces found a landmine explosive device and a radio-controlled detonator on a major road near Grozny.  The device included nine kilograms of hexogen and metal objects to increase lethality.  A federal sapper unit neutralized the landmine.
A bomb exploded at a Shia mosque and killed thirty people and injured dozens of others.  The explosion occurred during Friday prayers.  Nearly 1,000 people were inside of the mosque at the time.  Initial reports suggested that the bomb was set off by a suicide bomber.  However, later investigations revealed that the bomb was set of by a remote device, that was passed on to an innocent bystander.  The device later exploded.  Angry Shia protesters riot in the aftermath of the attack, which came days after Pakistani security forces killed Amjad Hussain Farooq, an al-Qaeda operative.
Unidentified people attacked the compound of the national solidarity programs in Khost city.  The programs are attached to the Ministry of Rural Development and Rehabilitation.  According to authorities, the attacks were meant to disrupt the elections and Afghanistan's reconstruction.
Twelve people were killed and at least sixty others injured in a bomb blasts targeting a rail line in Assam.  The first occurred at the Dimapur railway station, and resulted in the deaths of all twelve people.  The platform was packed with people waiting to board a train to Assam's Karbi district.
Izz-al-Din al-Qassam Brigades posted a video on their website showing masked men firing six anti-personnel Battar rockets at the Israeli settlement of Nitzarim in the middle of Gaza strip.  There were no reported casualties.
A low-powered explosive charge detonated at a warehouse in Bastia.  The warehouse belongs to Louis Multari, the chairman of the SC Bastia football club.  The charge was placed inside a fire extinguisher and went off in the middle of the night.  The blast damaged the metal shutter in the warehouse but caused no injuries.
A truck driven by a suicide bomber was detonated at the entrance to the Green Zone in Baghdad.  The driver targeted an Iraq police forces compound at one of the Green Zone entrances, and appears to have targeted the police.  Initial reports were ten dead and more than seventy wounded.
In Pattani provice, a driver for the provincial prison was shot at while driving to work. The driver said that two men on a motorcycle approached his truck and shot at him four times.
A Taliban rocket attack on a village killed a girl and injured three others.  The attack took place only days before a national election is to take place in Afghanistan.  The Taliban opposes the election.
The governor of Badakhshan Province and three other people were injured in an explosion. Two other people died in the incident, in which a landmine was detonated by remote-control.  Hamid Karzai's running mate, Ahmed Zia Masud, was 200 meters away from the explosion. He was not injured in the attack.
A remote-detonated bomb killed six civilians.  The device was planted in a vehicle which was traveling on a road to Qalat. A number of others were injured in the explosion as well.  The Taliban is suspected behind the attack, which takes place only days before a scheduled national election.
A car bomb attack on the Hilton hotel in the Egyptian resort city of Taba killed approximately thirty-four people and wounded upwards of one hundred.   Among those killed in the three operations were numerous foreigners including thirteen Israelis, two Italians, and a Russian woman.  Initial speculation on the identity of the attackers focused on al-Qa`ida, given the characteristics of the attack (near simultaneous car-bombs) and recent messaging by Ayman al-Zawahiri warning of future attacks against Israel. However, the Egyptian security services have fingered a heretofore unknown group, composed of an Egyptian born Palestinian ringleader, Ayad Said Saleh, who died unintentionally in the Taba bombing with fellow conspirator, Suleiman Ahmed Saleh Flayfil.  Investigators believe the attacks were motivated by the deterioration of the Palestinian situation, rather than the global jihad.  Multiple groups claimed responsibility for the attacks, though none were ever substantiated.  Tawhid Islamic Brigades, Jemaah Islamiya (JI), and the Battalions of the Martyr Abdullah Azzam, Al-Qaeda in the Levant and Egypt all claimed responsibility.
An attack on members of the public force and civilians by Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) militants was prevented by personnel from the Administrative Department of Security in Morroa Municipality. Security personnel found seven soccer-ball bombs, each filled with 6 kg of explosives and shrapnel half-buried on the road from Morroa to El Naranjal, near to the Escovar hamlet rural school. The explosive devices were defused by security personnel.
Insurgents blew up the Red Crescent offices in Ramadi.  The perpetrators are unknown, as is the number of casualties.
A group of members of the Kurdistan Workers' Party/Democratic Congress of Kurdistan (PKK/KONGRA-GEL) attacked a gendarmerie station in Girmeli, in Mardin Province.  The attackers used rocket launchers and long-barreled weapons to fire at the station.  There were no injuries, but some material damage was caused.
The Taliban fired six missiles on Lashkargah.  Two rockets hit a mosque where polling was taking place.  The attacks came only a few days before national elections are scheduled to take place.
Two missiles were fired on Asadabad city.  One landed near the Fatime Lycee where voting was underway.  The home of the province's security commander, Matyollah Khan is also near the lycee.
Three missiles were fired at the Sarkani district days before national elections were scheduled to take place.  The perpetrators also opened fire with small arms in the same direction.  It is unclear what the intended target of the attack was.
A suicide bomber driving a vehicle carrying explosives detonated the vehicle near a line of volunteers joining the Iraqi police.  Seventeen people were reported killed; the number of wounded was unknown.  The attack was quickly claimed by Tawhid and Jihad's Martyrdom Brigade on an unknown website.
A bomb exploded in front of the election headquarters of Sergey Baghapsh, a candidate for president of Abkahzia (legally a province of Georgia, but with de facto independence) in the October 3 election. Baghapsh appears to be leading in this election, but a second round of voting will be held on October 17.  No one was hurt in the explosion.
The Kurdistan Freedom Hawks (TAK) claimed responsibility for an attack targeting the Agriculture Province Directorate in Ankara.  The mode of the attack is not stated.  In their claim of responsibility, the group writes, Policies that aim to humiliate and dishonor the Kurdish people are still being pursued.
One person was injured when a bomb fell on Kabul.  The attack comes only days before a national election is to be held in Afghanistan.
Unknown gunmen opened fire on Abd-al-Majid Ibrahim Al-Antar, a Kurdish member of the Ninawa Governorate Council, killing him at the Al-Ghabat crossroads in Mosul.  He is the third member of the Ninawa Council to be assassinated since the US occupation.
A bomb exploded near a branch office of the Bank for Agriculture and Agricultural Cooperative in Pattani Province's Ka Po district. Police say it was detonated by cell phone. Nearly simultaneously, police found a suspected bomb at a bridge about 10 km away.  Seven hours earlier, a paramilitary volunteer was killed and five policemen injured when gunmen opened fire on a government office and nearby police station at Kapho town in Pattani province, just 300 m away from the site of the first blast.  There were no reports of any causalities.
Police defused a bomb that was discovered in Fantasy Mall in the East Kalimantan city of Balikpapan. The bomb, described as a low-explosive device, was inside a plastic bag in the mall's Amazone game center. It was found by an employee, who then alerted a security guard. The security guard then called the police, and a bomb squad defused the bomb outside of the shopping center.
The Kurdistan Freedom Hawks (TAK) claimed responsibility for attacking the Saray Hotel in the Laleli neighborhood of Istanbul.  The tactic and weapon used in the attack are unknown.  The group claims that they carried out the attack in retaliation for the destruction of the forests by the Turkish Armed Forces in their operations in Kurdistan.  In their statement of claim, the group threatens, our actions in Turkey will continue so long as the Turkish state continues to burn down forests in Kurdistan.
An investigation magistrate, Abd-al-Amir Kazim al-Shammari was killed by unknown gunmen as he left his home.
Unidentified attackers threw a homemade bomb at an International Labor Organization office in Defense Officers Colony.  The building sustained minor damage.
Five churches were attacked in Baghdad on the night of October 15. The attacks were apparently a coordinated assault on the Christian community in Baghdad. The attacks come at the start of the Muslim holy month, Ramadan. A sixth church also faced a mortar attack. No casualties were reported.  The first occurred at the church of Saint Joseph in the west of the city.
Five churches were attacked in Baghdad on the night of October 15. The attacks were apparently a coordinated assault on the Christian community in Baghdad. The attacks come at the start of the Muslim holy month, Ramadan. A sixth church also faced a mortar attack. No casualties were reported. The fifth occurred occurred at Saint Thomas church in Mansour.
Two bombs were detonated  by suicide bombers in the 'Green Zone' of Baghdad, killing at least ten people, including four Americans (all workers at Dyncorp), and wounding twenty others (including two US state department employees). The bombs were set off close together at a market and popular caf. The group led by Abu Musab Al-Zarquawi, Tawhid and Jihad, claimed responsibility for the blasts.  Two Jordanian men are suspected of perpetrating the caf blast. Both entered the caf, drank tea, and then one left. The other detonated his bomb following the exit of the first man.  At least six were killed and about eighteen injured in the caf blast.  None of the killed in this incident were Americans.
The third of three rockets to hit Kabul, landed near a wall, but caused no significant damage after failing to explode.  All three rockets were fired on private homes and are being blamed on people who want to distrub the peace in Kabul.
The Baghdad Mansour Hotel, the location of China's embassy in Iraq and the headquarters for many foreign contractors and other diplomats, was attacked by a mortar shell. The shell landed in the parking lot of the hotel, shattering some windows. No casualties were reported.
Iraqi militants kidnapped an Australian journalist, John Martinkus, who is affiliated with the Sydney based SBS network. He was kidnapped from Baghdad and was released twenty-four hours later after the kidnappers googled his name and investigated some of his work.
An unidentified Islamic group kidnapped and killed a policeman in Al-Nassiriya. Mohaned Kamel Teama had been missing for one day and his father received a note from a group calling itself the 'Guards of Islam', saying that Teama would be killed for his work with the multinational forces.
The Martyr Izz-al-Din al-Qassam Brigades, the military wing of Hamas, claimed responsibility for three attacks on three Israeli settlements. The first occurred at Gadid settlement and included five mortar shells.
Three Syrian drivers were kidnapped west of Mosul. Their trucks, which were carrying power generators for US troops, were set ablaze. The kidnappers were unknown and no demands have been made.
A bomb exploded in Narathiwat, a few meters away from where monks under Army protection were making their morning alms rounds. The bomb was detonated by cell phone. No one was injured. Authorities believe that the bomb is the work of Muslim insurgents.
Sawad Jia-kong, a teacher, narrowly escaped injury when he attacked by gunmen after he parked his car at Pattana Islam School in Pattani province. The attackers wore Muslim attire, and the teacher dove for cover as he saw the assailants pull guns and aim in his direction.  The attack left three bullet holes in his car. Police are trying to determine the attack is linked to separatist violence.
The office of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan was attacked in Mosul with three RPG rockets followed by machine gun fire, but there were no casualties.  The attack caused material damage to the building.
Gunmen opened fire on a bus carrying female employees of the Iraqi Airways at the Baghdad airport, killing one woman and injuring fourteen others. Sources indicate that two cars of armed men stopped the bus on the western outskirts of the capital. One assailant threw at least two hand grenades into the bus and then gunmen opened fire from the outside.
Unidentified men blew up the headquarters of the Iraqi Republican Grouping Party in Tikrit. The building was destroyed, but no injuries were reported.
An explosive device, made of two gas canisters and a detonator, exploded in front of a Citibank branch in Peristeri.  The blast caused minor material damage to the glass and outside of the building, but there were no reported injuries.  A group calling themselves Social Solidarity Group (Omadha Koinoniki Alliengii) claimed responsibility for the attack.  The group stated, solidarity with the persecuted 17N and ELN members, and to all detainees and to Alexandhros Yiotopoulos.
Palestinian militants attacked Israeli settlements with mortar fire following the killing by IDF forces of a top Hamas official. At least fifteen mortar rounds were fired on the settlement of Neve Dekalim, damaging houses but causing no casualties. One militant was short and another wounded as they prepared to launch mortar rounds.  Izz-al-Din al-Qassam Brigades, a military-wing of Hamas, posted a statement on their website claiming responsibility for this and other attacks.
Palestinian militants attacked Israeli settlements with mortar fire following the killing by Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) forces of a top Hamas official. A Battar rocket and a Qassam rocket were fired at the Netzarim settlement, setting fire to at least one house.  Izz-al-Din al-Qassam Brigades, the military wing of Hamas, posted a statement on their website claiming responsibility for this and other attacks.
The Kurdistan Freedom Hawks (TAK) claimed responsibility for an attack against the Security Directorate in Mezitli, in Mersin Province.  The group threatened that every attack against Kurdish people will have the same retaliation.  Their statement added, we will attack as deemed necessary.  The weapon and tactic of the attack are unknown.  On 1 November, three men were arrested in connection with this attack.  The three were identified as Abdullah A., Abdulkadir T., and Hasan D.  Police also found a grenade, $400, propaganda materials, receipts of funds provided to the organization, three cell phones and three passports in the suspects' custody.  These three also have connections to the Kurdistan Workers' Party/Democratic Congress of Kurdistan (PKK/KONGRA-GEL).
Two policemen were wounded when car bomb exploded near a police station in Al-Ishaqi.  No further information is available.
Two civilians were killed when two mortars fell on the Al-Karradah area in Baghdad.
A rocket fell on the Lawyers' Syndicate building in the Al-Mansur neighborhood in central Baghdad creating a big hole in the building's roof. No casualties were reported.
A bomb exploded near the office of the Danish Committee for Aid to Afghan Refugees (DACAAR).  The explosion did not cause any damage.  There is no mention of perpetrator or whether there are any DACAAR staff in the office.  No injuries or fatalities were reported.  It is of note to mention that DACAAR has been operating in Afghanistan since 1988.  Just one month and a half prior to this bombing in Herat, workers in the southern provinces of Helmand, Kandahar and Uruzgan had been told to suspend operations temporarily due to the death of four workers during an ambush on the road (purportedly the Taliban).
A bomb hidden near the Baghdad home of Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari was defused by police.
Two suicide car bombs detonated in Mosul, killing at least three Iraqis and wounding at least nine government employees. Both suicide attackers were also killed.  The first bomb caused most of the causalities and targeted a Nineveh governate compound.
An unidentified man threw a hand grenade at a Catholic Church near a public park in the New Town Police Station Area.  The police were able to defuse the device before it detonated.  It was stated that the device would have been quite destructive, but could not fully explode after being thrown. This is the second incident of a bomb attack on this particular church within the week.
Suspected members of the Kurdistan Workers' Party/Democratic Congress of Kurdistan (PKK/KONGRA-GEL) attempted to set an oil pipeline on fire in the town of Dovecik.  The perpetrators exploded a tube filled with explosives at the line, which belongs to the Turkish Petroleum Partnership (TPAO), but no damage was caused.
Two Palestinians were discovered planting a bomb near the settlement of Ganey Tal. They were hit by Air Force personnel and their bomb exploded.  Both men were killed.
Two Qassam rockets were fired at the settlement of Sederot. Hamas's military wing claimed responsibility.
A polish woman, Teresa Borcz, working with a US supplier was kidnapped in Iraq by a previously unknown group, Abu Bakr al-Siddiq Fundamentalist Brigades. The kidnappers demanded the withdrawal of Polish troops from Iraq and the release of Iraqi female prisoners. Polish officials denied that the woman was affiliated with the Polish defense ministry. The woman has lived in Iraq for almost 30 years and is an Iraqi citizen.Borcz was released November 19 and returned to Warsaw. She refused to disclose any details surrounding her release.
A bomb exploded outside a bar frequented by tourists in Narathiwat province.  Two tourists, Malaysian national Sawakiaat Hoe and Thai national Pissamai Daengdamdi, were killed in the blast. At least twenty-one were wounded. Reports indicate the blast may have been a revenge attack for the eighty-five Muslim protesters crushed to death on Oct. 25 en route to a military detention center.  It is not clear if the bar was the intended target. A police station was also nearby the blast.
A small explosive device, which was connected to a cable, detonated under an overpass on Petrou Ralli street in the Tavros district of Athens.  The device was targeting MAT riot police buses, which were passing under the overpass at the time of the blast.  There were no injuries and only minor damage was caused.  The MAT police officers were headed to Koridhallos jail to begin their duty when they were attacked.  In June 2005, the Revolutionary Struggle group claimed responsibility for this attack and a number of others.  In their statement of claim, the group says that the attack was perpetrated as 'a response to the Greek state's participation in the war against terrorism.'
A sound bomb was thrown at the Batman Security Directorate, in Batman Province.  The device detonated at the Juvenile Department within the directorate, causing no casualties, but damaging a police vehicle.  The device had been hurled from a passing vehicle and police were investigating the incident.
A bomb exploded near a bus stop along Bogot's Transmilenio bus system route. A taxi passing by was caught in the blast resulting in the death of the driver and a passenger. Two other passengers were also injured. The explosion damaged about 30 houses in the area. The chief of police believes the attack was aimed at the bus stop but did not comment on the motive of the attack or who was responsible for it. The Transmilenio system has been the target of at least three attacks.
Gunmen blew up the Al-Latifiyah Bridge that connects al-Hillah city with Baghdad causing a large traffic jam, but no casualties.
A group calling themselves the 'Informal Anarchic Federation- Metropolitan Insurgent Cells' claimed responsibility for staging small bomb attack that took place at a Manpower employment agency office in Milan.  The device, which was made of a small firecracker, detonated outside the entrance to the building, causing no injuries and only minor damage.  The device was detonated by a slow-burning fuse.  The group also claimed responsibility for two other explosive attacks in Milan that took place in November 2004.
A Bangledeshi man was taken hostage by a group calling itself the Islamic Army. A Sri Lankan man was believed to have been kidnapped at the same time. Abul Kashem was working for Al Jaseem Company.
The first of two explosions on October 31 targeted the Staropromyslovskoye highway near Grozny, killing one and injuring another.  This first blast took place at approximately 7:40 AM when a VAZ-2109 car exploded as a presidential security motorcade passed.  When the two injured were taken to Hospital No. 9, a Zhiguli parked outside the hospital exploded, injuring more than a dozen others.  The total casualties from both attacks were one dead, nineteen wounded.  Russian security services assert that the attacks were linked.  Major Ilya Shabalkin of the Russian Regional Operations Headquarters stated that the acts were carried out by gunmen of Yunadi Turchayev's bandit group on the direct orders of Maskhadov and Basayev.
Gunmen kidnapped an American, a Nepali, a Filipino, and two Iraqis from the offices of their company, the Saudi Arabian Trading and Contracting Company, in western Baghdad. The Iraqis worked as guards for the company. One guard was killed in the attack. The Iraqis were later freed by their captors, but the American, Filipino, and Nepalese citizens remained in captivity.  The group holding the hostages was identified as Jaish al-Mujahideen or Mujahideen Army.On November 5, 2004 officials announced that the Nepalese hostage had been released.  The Filipino hostage was identified as Robert Tarongoy. The group holding the men hostage demanded $12 million ransom for the US captive and $10 million ransom for the Filipino captive. The ransom for the Filipino hostage was later reduced to $6 million, although Filipino officials said that they would not negotiate. They also demanded the release of four prisoners now held at Abu Ghraib. The American hostage was identified as Roy Hallums.  On January 25, 2005 the militant group holding Hallums released a video showing Hallums with a rifle pointing at his head. Hallums asked for help to save his life, not from the US or President Bush, but from Arab rulers, particularly  Libyan leader Gadhafi, because he 'has been known to help those who are suffering.' There are no flags or banners in the video and no demands are made.  In early March, the group issued a new threat to kill the Filipino hostage on March 11, 2005 if the Filipino government did not comply with their demand that all Filipino workers leave Iraq. After negotiations, the group relented and did not kill Tarongoy, agreeing to an indefinite extension of the deadline. The Filipino government claims it is working to meet the group's demands.On June 22, 2005, Tarongoy was freed by his captors following intense negotiations by Rafael Seguis, the lead negotiator in the case. It was unclear if there were other conditions attached to his release.On September 7, 2005, Roy Hallums was freed during a raid by US forces of a farmhouse outside of Baghdad. The kidnappers escaped without a gun battle however.
A teenage Palestinian suicide bomber struck on outdoor market in Tel Aviv, killing at least three people and wounding more than thirty. The bomber hit the Carmel Market at 11am, causing a big explosion using 5kg of explosives. The attack was claimed by the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP). The group said they carried our the attack to show that Arafat's illness would not stop the fight against the Israeli occupiers and as a warning to those who talk of reducing the resistance movement.  Israeli forces razed the home of the suicide bomber the following day in retaliation.
Two explosions destroyed a beach disco in the town of Bastia.  There was no one at the premises at the time of the attack and no injuries were caused.  This is the second time this disco has been attacked.  No further information is available.
Unknown gunmen assassinated Husayn al-Fattal, director general of Northern Oil Company, responsible for the distribution of Iraqi oil products, near his home in Baghdad.
Benhur Ramirez Rizo, Yotoco Municipal Council President, was shot and killed while resisting several armed men who apparently tried to kidnap him.  Ramirez was at a bus stop when the attack took place.  Two vehicles were captured shortly after the attack, one was an armored vehicle.  It is unknown who carried out the attack or what motivated it, but police believe a group called La 19 could have been involved.
Gunmen abducted a Lebanese American contractor, who worked with the US Army, from his home in Baghdad. Radim Sadeq, a contractor with a mobile phone company was taken by gunmen when he answered the door of his home.  This is the second such incident that took place in the upscale neighborhood of Mansour in this week.
There was an explosion at the USAID compound in Jalalabad.  Perpetrator is unknown and it was reported that no casualties were sustained  On the same day, a bomb went off in Jalalabad outside of the compound of a Swedish Aid Agency.  No relation has been claimed  between the attacks.
Terrorists attacked a freight train which was operating between Mosul and Baghdad.  The perpetrators burned the train, and killed all the members of the crew. The attack was begun with rockets and then followed by an armed assault. Four people were killed in the assault.
A mortar shell was fired at Rall Zu'rub in Rafah. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
An explosive device attached to the Ukhta-Torzhok gas pipeline in Russia's Tver region was disarmed by the Federal Security Service (FSB).  The device consisted of an antitank round, a detonator, and a timer.  The perpetrators are unknown.
Two Quds-2 rockets were fired at the Netzer Hazani settlement. The Islamic Jihad movement claimed responsibility for the attack.
Qassam rockets were fired at the hothouses in Gadid settlement. A statement on the website of Hamas's military wing claimed responsibility for the attack. Damage was caused, but no one was injured.
An attack by gunmen on a police station in southern Samarra killed or wounded fifteen people (the report does not disaggregate the number of killed or injured).  The attack occurs on the same day as extensive violence in the city.
A suicide car bomb exploded in front of a police station in Samarra. This was one of four bombs that exploded nearly simultaneously in front of different police stations in the city. The fourth bomb exploded slightly after the first three. At least forty-two people were killed and sixty-two wounded in all four attacks. The group affiliated with Abu Musab al-Zarqawi claimed responsibility for the attacks.Note: No information on each individual attack's casualty numbers was available.
Palestinians fired a mortar at the Qatif Bloc, causing no damage or casualties.
A Turkish driver was killed by armed men in Iraq. A missile attack was carried out against the truck driver near Samarra.
A group calling itself the 'Informal Anarchic Federation- Metropolitan Insurgent Cells,' claimed responsibility for a bomb attack that targeted the Corso Lodi head office of the temporary employment company, Adecco.  The blast damaged two shop windows and the window of a car parked nearby.  In their claim of responsibility, the group called for the attacking of banks and employment agencies.
Three bombs exploded on Sunday around Quetta.  One of these bombs exploded near a government building.  No casualties were reported.  According to the Kalat police, one room in the building was damaged.
An explosive device was found near the settlement of Hermesh in northern Samaria. It was detonated safely by Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) personnel.
Soldiers shot and killed a Palestinian who was planting an explosive charge near Nabulus.
According to foreign sources, two small bombs exploded in Laos at the Thai-Lao Friendship Bridge linking it to Thailand three weeks ahead of a regional summit meeting.  Thai officials on the Thai side of the bridge could not confirm the explosion, while Laotian officials denied the explosion had occurred. The underground group claiming responsibility, the Undergroup Government of the Free Democratic People of Laos, warned that more explosions could occur during the ASEAN summit scheduled for Nov. 24-29 in Vientiane.
Two mortar shells landed in an Israeli settlement in Qatif Bloc. No one was hurt, but a house hit by a shell was badly damaged.
A Qassam rocket was fired at Western Negev. No casualties resulted.
The Mafraq Police Station in Baqubah was attacked  by gunmen. This was one of three police station attacks on this day. A total of forty-five people were killed and thirty-two wounded, mostly police men.  Note casualty figures obtained only for the three attacks total.
Thre mortars were fired at the settlement of Neve Deqalim. No one was hurt.
Mortar fire fell on the Nisanit settlement. Three people were treated for shock when a mortar fell on their house. Another shell fell on a kindergarten building.
New People's Army (NPA) rebels ambushed Emmanuel Maning Capistrano as he was riding his motorcycle. The victim was shot and killed as he was stopped by the rebels. The victim's brother is the former mayor of Salay in Misamis Oriental and current chairman of Poblacion Village. The victim's brother's wife is the incumbent mayor of the town. Authorities suspect Capistrano was killed because he was assisting police in operations against the NPA.
Insurgents attacked several police stations, overwhelming and eventually controlling some of them. Several police cars were also burned. No information on how many or which police stations were attacked was available. The attacks occurred as US forces tried to control the insurgents in the city.
A bomb exploded at 6 pm at the Angmor Restaurant in Narathiwat province's Muang city district. At least sixteen people were seriously injured.  A person posing as a customer left an explosives-filled bag behind a refrigerator in the restaurant and detonated it via mobile phone after leaving. The restaurant is frequented by ethnic Thais and Chinese in the province.  Within two hours, two other bombs exploded in the province: one at a general store in Tak Bai, the other at a military checkpoint in the Bacho district. No one was injured in these bombings.  The coordinated blasts appear to be a continuation of the violence in the area since the Oct. 25 riot in Tak Bai in which eighty-five people were killed.
The Al-Ghabat Police Station was burned. No casualties were reported because the station had been evacuated.
Gunmen attacked two adjoining police buildings in Mosul, forced the policemen out, set prisoners free, seized the weapons and blew up the buildings.
Police defused a bomb found near the fence of Ban Yi-ngor School in Yi-ngor district, Narathiwat province. The school is located next to the residential quarters of the local police station.
A Turkish oil tank driver was killed in northern Iraq. Assailants beat to death the driver and then fired bullets into his body. The victim had not yet been identified.
A Palestinian threw two firebombs at a gas station on the Jerusalem Ma'ale road. The firebombs shattered on the road but did not ignite. Police arrested the man and are currently looking for another suspect.
Syed Mulazim Hussain Shah, a Shia leader was shot and injured by unknown attackers at Pind Mako (near Malakwal-Punjab Province).  The religious leader was on his way to offer prayers at the mosque in the morning when he was attacked from behind.  The attackers fled the scene.
Two members of the Palestinian security services were killed in a shooting at the mourning tent for Yasser Arafat.  The attack took place as PLO leader Mahmud Abbas visited the site. Four others were wounded in the attack. It seems that the incident was targeted at Abbas who was not injured in the attack.
One mortar was fired at the settlement of Dugit. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
Two Qassam missiles were launched at settlements in Qatif Bloc. No one was injured and no damage reported.
Haji Mawin, provincial deputy governor reported that the Taliban attacked a police post in Helmand's Kajaki district.  Six policemen were killed and one Taliban fighter's body was left at the post.  The weapon and tactic were not mentioned in the report.
The oil pipeline linking the Bayji and Al-Durah refineries was blown up by gunmen.
An unknown group left two bombs at one Citibank Branch in Buenos Aires.  A private security guard was injured and later died at the hospital after one of the packaged bombs exploded.  A second packaged bomb was deactivated at the same Bank branch. It is not clear if the attacks were coordinated, however, two more bombs were found the same day (one at another Citibank branch in Buenos Aires, and one at Banco Galicia).  These are represented in separate incidents.
An explosion occurred near the governor's office in Mosul and a number of mortar shells fell near the office as well. One guard was killed and four wounded in the incident, but the governor was not wounded.
Several explosions occurred in central Baghdad near the Green Zone where the headquarters of the Iraq and US leadership is based.
A suicide bomber exploded his vehicle near an Iraqi police patrol in Baghdad.  One policeman was injured and one killed. Up to ten bystanders were also wounded.
The adviser at the Iraqi Ministry of Social Affairs, Dr. Amal Abd Al Hamid was killed along with her secretary and two companions when her convoy was attacked in Baghdad.
Four workers from the Ministry of Public Works were killed by gunmen as they drove to work in Baghdad.  No further information is available.
An explosion near an oil well in the Khabazah village near Kirkuk caused a fire and large amounts of smoke.
A firebomb exploded in a policeman's house. The attack was part of a coordinated attack that included four other fire bombs, which exploded just minutes apart in Pattani. The bombs were described as Molotov cocktails and were thrown at four homes and a shop in city. Another policeman and a civil servant were among those whose homes were targeted by suspected insurgents.
A firebomb detonated at a Vodaphone mobile phone company store in the Exarchia neighborhood in Athens.  The blast started a fire, which caused major damage to the store.  No more information is available.
Palestinians fired several Mortar shells at settlements in the Qatif Bloc. No injuries were reported.
Three mortar shells were fired at the Ganey Tal settlement. The shells fell near the gate. No casualties were caused. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
A Turkish contractor working with US forces was kidnapped from his home in Kirkuk when gunmen invaded the home and abducted him. The contractor was identified as Dhia al-Naftachi, who holds contracts with US forces in Tikrit and Balad. Two of al-Naftachi's relatives were injured in the attack. Contractors who work with US forces are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
Four mortar shells were fired at the Neve Deqalim settlement. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack on their website.
A doctor and colonel in the former Iraqi Army, Dr. Nasif Jawad al-Masaudi, who was in charge of the Iraqi National Coalition's Office of Provincial Relations was gunned down on his way to his office in Baghdad. He had only returned to Iraq two days earlier.
Army bomb experts were able to safely defuse a firebomb which was found at a department store in Belfast.  No group has claimed responsibility, though police suspect a breakaway faction of the Irish Republican Army (IRA) of involvement.  This attempted attack comes as Northern Irish leaders are meeting to revive power-sharing institutions in the region.
A suicide bomber blew up his car near the 14 July suspension bridge in Baghdad, in an area close to the Green Zone. The attack caused many casualties (at least two) and set fire to several vehicles.  Witnesses say many of the victims were members of the Iraqi National Guard.
A Qassam rocket was fired at the settlement of Netzarim. The military wing of Hamas claimed repsonsibility for the attack.
A bomb was detonated outside the Iraqi Central Bank in Baghdad. Two civilians who did not work at the bank were killed in the attack.
A group of gunmen attacked a police unit in the Wahid Huzayran District. Two of the attackers were found, one dead and one alive. No police were injured in the attack.
A car bomb killed six people and injured five others when it hit two civilian vehicles in Samarra, 60 miles north of Baghdad. The blast occurred as a minibus drove past a school. All the casualties were passengers in the minibus.
One man was injured in two explosions near an office of Kazakhstan's ruling party.  Each bomb contained 200 grams of TNT.   One went off in a transformer house near the office and the other went off on a windowsill of the office's building, causing slight damage to the building.  No one in the office was hurt, as the staff were off that day.  The sole injury was to a passer-by.  Kazakhstan officials downplayed the incident.
Two mortar shells were fired at the Neve Deqalim settlement. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack on their website.
Three mortar shells were fired at the Atzmona settlement. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
Two religious scholars were killed in Iraq in Kirkuk Governorate. The men were brothers, Hasan Ibrahim Salih and Husayn Ibrahim Salih. They were killed after they had called on citizens to take part in the upcoming elections during a Friday prayer gathering.  There has been an increase in militant attacks in the lead up to these elections.  Insurgents oppose free elections in Iraq.
An Islamic Militant Group, Ansar al-Sunnah, abducted and killed three Iraqis who were working with US Marines. The statement of responsibility was released on the group's website and said that all those who cooperated with US forces would be dealt with harshly. The group also posted pictures of the three killed and their ID cards.
Two mortar shells were fired at the Neve Deqalim settlement. No damage was reported. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
The Taliban attacked the staff of the Ministry of Rural Development in the Farah Province.  Three were killed, two wounded, and one was taken hostage.  The date of the attack was not mentioned, however, Mohammad Hanif Atmar, Afghan Rural Development Minister released his statement regarding the attack on 1 December.  The tactic and weapon were unknown.
A mortar round struck near a mobile phone office, Iraquna Mobile Phone Company, in Baghdad's Arasat neighborhood, killing one person and wounding three others.  This was one of several mortar attacks in Baghdad on this day. A total of three people were killed and dozens wounded.
A mortar attack was launched against the Abi-Nuwwas theater in Baghdad.  This was one of several attacks in Baghdad on this day. A total of three people were killed and dozens wounded.
Gunmen shot and killed the Deputy Chief of the Central Investigation Bureau at the Diyala Police command in Balad Ruz. One of his companions was also killed.
The Taliban claimed to have fired ten rockets at an airport.  The airport is unknown. Taliban spokesman, Mofti Latifollah Hakimi's statement was that there was no information on casualties.
Unknown individual shelled the Ninawa Governorate building in Mosul with three mortar shells. The shells fell on a residential community near the building, wounding at least ten people.
Four mortar shells were fired on Neve Deqalim settlement. No casualties were reported. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
A small, low-potency explosive device, detonated at a petrol station along the N-5 highway (which leads to Lisbon) in Madrid.  This was one of five explosive attacks on petrol stations throughout Madrid on this evening.  An anonymous caller representing the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) warned of the devices prior to their detonation.  Six people were slightly injured in the attacks, though it is impossible to disaggregate the numbers for each individual attack. The attacks came as residents were traveling away from the city for a holiday weekend.
A small, low-powered explosive device detonated at a petrol station on the A-6 highway that leads from Madrid to Toledo.  This was one of five explosive attacks on petrol stations throughout Madrid on this evening.  An anonymous caller representing the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) warned of the devices prior to their detonation.  Six people were slightly injured in the attacks, though it is impossible to disaggregate the numbers for each individual attack. The attacks came as residents were traveling away from the city for a holiday weekend.
A car bomb exploded in the Kurnaysh al-A'zamiyah neighborhood. The blast occurred immediately following a mortar attack on the presidential palace in the neighborhood. The combined attacks killed twenty people, though it is impossible to disaggregate the number killed in each incident.
Five mortar shells were fired at the Morage settlement. No injuries were reported. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
Gunmen carried out an attack on a police station in Baghdad using mortars and machine guns. No significant damage was caused in the attack.
Three mortar shells were fired at the Atzmona settlement. No injuries were reported. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
A Battar rocket was fired at the Nahal Oz settlement. No injuries were reported. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
Unknown gunmen set fire to a large underground oil reservoir. The fire caused extensive damage to the reservoir.  Oil facilities are the frequent target of attacks in Iraq.
The police chief of the Diyala Governorate escaped an assassination attempt. Colonel Abd-al-Jalil Ibrahim and his driver sustained wounds when their car was attacked by gunmen as the Colonel was leaving his home. One child and an Iraqi civilian were killed.
One police officer was injured in an explosive attack in Ciudad Real.  An explosive device detonated in the kitchen of the El Peral caf in the city, after an anonymous caller representing the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) called in a warning of the attack.  This was one of seven bomb attacks that took place all over Spain on this day, a holiday to celebrate Spain's independence.  All seven of the bombs are being blamed on ETA.  These attacks also come only three days after a series of five explosive devices detonated at five gas stations in Madrid.  Those attacks are being blamed on ETA as well.
An explosive device detonated in Picara Justina Square in the city of Leon.  There were no reported injuries or damage caused by the device.  A caller, representing the Basque Fatherland and Freedom had called in a warning about the attack.  This was one of seven bomb attacks that took place all over Spain on this day, a holiday to celebrate Spain's independence.  All seven of the bombs are being blamed on ETA.  These attacks also come only three days after a series of five explosive devices detonated at five gas stations in Madrid.  Those attacks are being blamed on ETA as well.
Five mortar shells were fired at the Neve Deqalim settlement. No casualties were reported. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
A bomb went off in Rangae district, Narathiwat province. The bomb detonated at a gathering point of defense volunteers near Tanyongmas market. The senior chief of Rangae district, Preecha Nuannoi, was injured.
Four bombs detonated at Sukhumi's government compound in Georgia's breakaway republic of Abkhazia.The third of four blasts struck at about 4:20 am local time.   No one was hurt.  All explosions occurred in different places near the government compound, at intervals of about twenty minutes.
Militants bombed two churches in Mosul, wounding a total of three people in the attacks.  The first attack occurred at the church of the Chaldean bishopric in Mosul. Three people were wounded in this attack. The attackers ordered the guards out of the church before detonating the explosives. Severe damage was done to the church.
An explosive device detonated in front of an HSBC bank branch in the Fatih neighborhood of Istanbul.  The windows of the building's basement were shattered, but there were no injuries caused.  This was one of two explosive attacks in the city on this evening.
Two anti-armored projectiles were fired at the Kfar Darum settlement. The militants who fired the weapons then engaged the guards of the settlement. No injuries were reported. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
Two holiday homes, which belong to a resident of mainland France, were blown up in Saint-Florent.  The two properties suffered medium damage from the blast.  The attack took place on Nation Day on the island of Corsica, which is celebrated by most separatists on the island.
The home of the police chief of Samarra, Major General Talib Shamil Samarriee, was attacked by insurgents. On the request on his family, he had decided to resign.  Samarriee cites other attempted attacks on his family, including an attempted kidnapping of his son and an attack on his car as other reasons for his resignation.
A bomb exploded near two Iraqi police vehicles, as the vehicles passed by. The explosion killed one policeman and wounded five others. Only one of the cars was severely damaged.
Insurgents fired mortar rounds at the Italian Embassy in Baghdad. The mortars missed their target and injured two Iraqi civilians. The Italian Embassy has been the target of several attacks.
Two Qassam rockets were fired at the Elei Sinai settlement. No casualties were reported. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
Two Battar rockets were fired at the Netzarim settlement. No one was injured. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
An explosion destroyed a section of the Mozdok-Gazimagomed gas pipeline, injuring twenty-two people.  The fire resulting from an explosion of unknown origin began at about 10:00 pm Moscow time at the 614th kilometer of the pipeline just outside Makhachkala.  The explosion put about 148,000 people out of natural gas.  Most of the twenty-two injured were mildly to severely burned.  Preliminary analysis pointed to the possibility of an artillery shell aimed at the pipeline.
Israel Defense Forces (IDF) soldiers found and safely defused an explosive charge on the Israeli-Egyptian border near Rafah.
A powerful explosion occurred in Mosul, targeting the Police Academy. There was no additional information on this incident or the number of casualties.
U Zahkung Ting Ying, chairman of the New Democratic Army (Kachin or NDA-K), one of the Kachin national race armed groups that has signed a cease-fire with the SPDC, survived an assassination attempt.  The attack occurred at a time when NDA-K has been trying to mediate between the factions of the Kachin Independence Organization and while the SPDC has been trying to arrange for cease-fire groups to attend a national convention.  It is unclear who was responsible for the attempt. There was no mention of injuries in the report.
Two mortars were fired at the settlement of Rafiah Yam. No injuries were reported. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack and noted that the attack was retaliation for the murder of a Palestinian who died in an earlier Israeli attack.
A homemade explosive device detonated outside the premise of an unstated business in the town or Usubil.  The device was detonated at almost the same time another blast occurred at another business in Ormaitegi.  Only slight damage was caused.
A parcel bomb, made up of a video cassette packed with explosive powder and iron bolts, was discovered in a mail room at the National Carabinieri Association in Rome.  Authorities are blaming this bomb and a similar device found at the Independent Union of the Penitentiary Police (Sappe) only two days earlier, on anarchists.  The device in Rome didn't explode due to caution on behalf of the mail services office, who spotted the package and declared it suspicious.
In Asadabad, six people were seriously injured in an explosion. The Defense Ministry Spokesman, Gen Zaher Azimi said the wounded were residents of Asadabad city and that foreign terrorists (Arab extremists) were involved.
A Battar rocket was fired at the Nahal Oz settlement. No injuries were reported. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
One of the main power generating plants in Iraq, Sayhi thermal plant was set alight by unidentified perpetrators. The fire is believed to be an act of intentional sabotage. The fire caused damage to the fuel and water supply systems in one of the power generating plant in the station. The result was a suspension of power in Iraq and the stoppage of the power plant until repairs could be completed.
The Islamic Jihad Brigades announced that it kidnapped and killed two Americans, Dale Stoffel and Joseph Wemple. They claim that the two men are CIA agents. An American construction company in Iraq, CLI USA, said that the two men worked for the company.Note: date of kidnapping is approximate.
In a bus station in Jalalabad, one person was killed, two injured in an explosion.  The explosion took place at the Chaprahar bus station in the southern part of the city.  The perpetrator is unknown.
Two Qassam rockets were fired at the Neve Deqalim settlement. No damage was reported. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility.
Gunmen attack a convoy of Iraqi government trucks carrying supplies to the US troops. The gunmen used rockets and sub machine guns and set the trucks on fire. The attack occurred near Al-Qarmah. Casualty numbers were not reported.
A car-bombing occurred at the Jordan-Iraq border. The explosion occurred as a caravan of Iraqi trucks was passing through the border. There were casualties, but no report of the numbers of deaths/injuries. Officials believe the explosive device was located in one of the trucks. The border between Iraq and Jordan was closed as a result of the attack.
In one, in a series of explosions in Assam, carried out by the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) on 14 Dec, two persons were killed and twnety-six others wounded in an explosion at the Maya Bazaar in Morigaon town. The device had a timer on it.
In one in a series of explosions in Assam, carried out by the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) on 14 Dec, included an attack at the home of the State Labor Minister, Rameswar Dhanowar, at Digboi in the Tinsukia district.  There were no reports of injuries or fatalities
Gunmen ambushed two Turkish truck drivers traveling from Mosul to Balad, transporting supplies for US forces. Both truck drivers were killed and their trucks destroyed and burned in the attack near Balad. Contractors who supply US troops are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
An Italian citizen working in Iraq for a British NGO was kidnapped in Iraq. The man had an Italian passport and Lebanese residency and was identified as Salvatore Santoro. Militants kidnapped and then shot and killed the hostage when he tried to break through a guerilla roadblock on a highway outside of Ramadi. Santoro killed one of the militants with his car just prior to the kidnapping.  Militants showed the body of the dead Italian to Iraqi journalists and released photographs of the dead body. The militants claimed to be from the group known as Islamic Movement of Iraqi Mujahideen.
Gunmen killed two Iraqi women who worked at a US base in Southern Baghdad. Their driver was also killed in the attack. A group of unknown men opened fire on the car carrying the women. The women were identified as Inas Ayshu and Ibtisam Ayshu.
United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) terrorists threw a grenade at a Central Reserve Police Force patrol party at Sadiya Bazaar in the Tinsukia district.  There were no resulting injuries or fatalities.  This was one of three grenade attacks perpetrated on this day.
A roadside bomb exploded in western Baghdad as an SUV carrying foreigners was passing., After the blast, gunmen opened fire on the vehicle, killing one of the foreigners and wounding two others. No information on the nationality of the victims was reported.
The Morag settlement was shelled with three mortar shells. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack. No casualties were reproted.
Two Qassam rockets were fired at the Kissufim crossing. Six settlers were reported injured. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility.
A Qassam rocket was fired at the Nisanit settlement. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack which caused no injuries.
A Qassam rocket landed on the Neve Deqalim settlement. No injuries were caused or damage reported. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
A bomb exploded under an oil pipeline near the Baiji refinery causing damage to the pipeline. This was one of several oil attacks over a period of two days.  Oil pipelines are the frequent target of attacks.
Gunmen opened fire on the election center in Riyadh. No damage was reported. The attack comes in the lead up to the country's first election.
A Qassam rocket was fired at the Netzer Hazani settlement. No injuries were caused. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
Three Qassam rockets were fired at the Sederot settlement. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack. No injuries were reported.
Two Qassam rockets were fired at the Gadid settlement. No damage was reported. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
Three Qassam missiles were fired at the Morag settlement. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack which caused no injuries.
An attack occurred on an oil pipeline in a Sunni Arab area. This was one of several oil attacks over a period of two days.  Oil pipelines are the frequent target of attacks.
Insurgents fired mortars at the voter registration center in Dujail, killing one civilian and wounding eight others. The attack comes in the lead up to the election.
A car bomb exploded in the middle of a funeral procession in Najaf. The bomb was detonated only 300 yards from the Imam Ali Shrine, an important Shiite shrine. Nearby were crowds of people waiting for buses. At least fifty people were killed and ninety-one wounded in this attack. The explosion ruptured water pipes and caused damage to nearby shops.  The blast occurred only one day after a bomb attack in Karbala. The attacks may be linked to the upcoming elections.  On December 20, sources reported that at least fifty people had been detained in connection with the attack. On December 25, the governor of Najaf announced that the perpetrators of the attack had been arrested.
A rocket was fired on the Green Zone in Baghdad, where US forces are headquartered. A group calling itself the Divine Wrath Brigades claimed responsibility for the attack.
A Qassam rocket was fired at the Dugit settlement. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack. No injuries were caused.
The Homebase Store in the Waterside area of Londonderry was the target of a fire bomb attack.  An incendiary device, which had been left in the shop, partially exploded and caused some minor damage.  Shoppers were evacuated prior to the blast.  Police believe this was the most recent in a series of fire bombings that were most likely perpetrated by dissident republicans.
A local government functionary and an unidentified woman were killed in a presumed Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) ambush on a vehicle in Northern Uganda. The functionary, a local councilman variously reported as Martin Lacen or Martin Lanek, and the female passenger were both killed by gunfire. The driver of the vehicle, a priest by the name of Rev. John Olum, sustained gunshot wounds but survived. The rebels burned the vehicle after the attack.
Two qassam rockets were fired at the Elei Sinai settlement. No injuries were reported. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
A two mortar shells were  fired at the Nahal Oz settlement. No injuries were reported. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
An oil pipeline was blown up between Kirkuk and Bayji by an explosive charge set by unknown persons. The blast damaged the line and caused oil leakage.
Two mortar shells were fired at the Gaza Strip, hitting a kindergarten building.  Fortunately there were no reported injuries.
An explosion destroyed a Shiite shrine in Baghdad, the Ibrahim Bin Ali al-Hadi shrine. No casualties were caused.
An oil pipeline was damaged when unknown insurgents placed an explosive charge under a pipeline in the city of Baiji. The pipe feeds the largest refinery in the country. A large fire was caused as the result of this and another nearby pipeline attack.  This was one of two pipelines attacked in Bayji on this day.
The Vigorous Burmese Student Warriors claimed responsibility for a bomb that exploded outside a restaurant popular with foreign tourists in Myanmar's capital. The group demanded the immediate release of all political prisoners. The bombing injured one worker.
A Qassam rocket was fired at the Nahal Oz settlement. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack. No damage or casualties were reported.
The US and UK consulates in Basra were attacked by rocket-propelled grenades. The size of the damage was not reported.  No further information on the incident was available.
Two Qassam rockets and two batter rockets  were fired at the Netzer Hazani settlement. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack. No damage or injuries were reported.
A mortar shell fell on the Al-Ma'mum police station in western Baghdad. One police officer was killed and two wounded. The shell also caused damage to the station and nearby vehicles.
The Ashra Mohammadia Mosque in Baghdad, a Sunni mosque, was hit by a mortar shell. Three people were killed and three wounded in the attack.
The al-Ramadi District office and Mayor's office was blown up by unidentified gunmen. No casualties were reported in the attack. The office was vacant when the insurgents entered and planted explosive charges.
A bomb was placed outside the home of Sardar Sher Khan (Peace Committee member).  His son Kalilmullah exited the house and was killed by the blast.  Another bomb had gone off earlier in the day outside of the house, but Sher Khan remained unharmed.  The perpetrators are unknown.
Arsonists set fire to three telephone booths in the Muang and Krong Pinang districts in Yala province.  The telephone booth targeted in tambon Bannangsareng, Muang district was only minimally damaged.
Two Qassam rockets were fired at the Netzarim settlement. No damage or casualties were reported. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
The police station in Al-Mafraq was attacked by gunmen with mortars and rockets. US forces responded to repel the attack.
Ten trucks with food and oil supply for US forces were attacked by rocket in Khyber Agency's Jamrud area.  The attack occurred on the oil tanker which caused a fire and destroyed three trucks while damaging others.  No casualties were reported.
Four mortar shells fell in the northern Qatif bloc. A house was damaged but no injuries were caused.
Two firebombs were thrown at he Hasan Bakk Mosque in Tel Aviv. No one was hurt but some damage was caused to the mosque. Police suspect the Israelis were behind the attack.
An explosive charge hit an oil pipeline near Kirkuk. The explosion caused a large fire, which took officers a long time to extinguish.  No further information is available.
Two Nasser rockets were fired at the settlement of Elei Sinai. No damage was reported. The military wing of the Popular Resistance Committees claimed responsibility for the attack.
A small incendiary device was found in the pocket of a garment at the Old Creamery Retail Park in Newry, in County Down.  Police evacuated the premises and were able to safely dispose of the device.  This is one in a series of fire bombings all over Northern Ireland, which are being blamed on dissident republicans.  Police have warned business holders to check their premises for these types of devices because of this spate of attacks.
An unidentified number of attackers opened fire on a police truck carrying five offers from the Thung Yang Daeng district police station.  The truck was travelling in Yarang district when the suspected insurgents struck. No one was injured.
Several gunshots were fired by unknown gunmen at the headquarters of Palestinian presidential candidate, Bassam Salhi in Ramallah.  No injuries were caused by the shooting.
Three unexploded incendiary devices were found at a construction site in Lincoln, California.  Authorities believe that this incident is the work of eco-terrorists, as they found graffiti spray painted at the scene with phrases like, Enjoy the world as is- as long as you can and U will pay.  No group has claimed responsibility.  This incident occurred in the Catta Verdera development in Twelve Bridges, an upscale golf course community.  Two of the devices were planted inside homes and the third was found in a trench.  All three were rigged with timing devices that apparently failed to operate properly.
The deputy governor of Al-Anbar, Mu'ayyad Marwan al-Atawi, was kidnapped by unknown persons. His body was found in al-Ramadi several hours later. No information on the perpetrators of this attack was given.
Gunmen attacked the municipal council building in Baiji wounding two guards. The attack occurred at the end of working hours.
Gunmen attacked a police station in Tikrit, killing twelve police officers.  No further information is available.
A car bomb exploded outside the Interior Ministry building in Riyadh. The car was driven by a suicide bomber who detonated his vehicle outside the compound after trying to drive his car into the building. The explosion broke windows of the building. Six police officers were wounded and one bystander was killed.  This was the first of two bombings, 30 minutes apart on this same night within five miles of each other. The attacks come shortly after Saudi security forces were involved in a shootout during a raid of an area where a terror suspect had been killed the night before.  Saudi forces carried out raids following the attacks, killing seven militants that they believe were involved. Those involved were members of several radical groups.  On January 4, sources reported that a group affiliated with Al-Qaeda, al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, claimed responsibility for the blasts, claiming that the targets were the Interior Minister, Nayef bin Abdel Aziz al Saud, and his son.
Two policemen were wounded following an attack on their patrol east of Balad.  The weapon used in the attack is not stated.
Gunmen attacked a police station in Mosul. One policeman was killed in the attack.  No further information is provided.
Gunmen assassinated three police officers who work in the Tribil Passport Department while they were vacationing in Diyala Governorate.
A bomb exploded on an oil pipeline north of Iraq. The pipeline feeds the biggest crude refinery in the country. The explosion caused the pipeline to be set on fire. The attack occurred in Kirkuk and disrupted oil flow along the pipeline.
A rocket was fired at a settlement in the Qatif bloc. The military wing of Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine claimed responsibility for the attack. No damage was reported.
Asmatullah Khan Gandapur, a political agent, was targeted in a road-side bomb, believed to be remote-detonated.  The political appointee was returning from his visit to the Gamal Zam Dam in Khajuri Kach (with members of the Senate Standing Committee).  There were seventeen officials, led by Pir Nooral Haq Qadri present during the visit.  Gandapur had received threats before as a result of his campaign against the militants in his area.  He was injured along with his driver, Mehrdali Mahsud.  Both were treated at the hospital.  No group has claimed this attack.
Two mortars were fired at the Atzmona settlement.  No damage was reported. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
Arsonists set Ban Suanphla School in Narathiwat province on fire, slightly damaging a wall and teaching materials.
Security forces thwarted an attempt by a group of men to attack the oil pipeline and refinery near Basra. The men were attempting to fire Katyusha rockets at the oil refinery. One of the attackers was killed and two were arrested.
A Qassam rocket was fired at the Elei Sinai settlement. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack. No damage was reported.
A police officer was killed in Kirkuk. He was one of three policemen assassinated in this city in a three day period.
Antauro Humala, former army major and the leader of an armed nationalist group referred to as the Ethnocacerista movement, and his armed followers seized a police station and took ten police officers hostage on Saturday.  The conflict ended four days later with the surrender of Humala at 10:30 pm on Monday and the surrender of his followers, nearly 100 former members of the Peruvian army, at 11:30 am on Tuesday.  The group demanded the resignation of Peru's President Alejandro Toledo and opposes foreign investment. Four police officers and two rebels were killed and several people were injured throughout the conflict (note - reports do not specify how many were injured but reported that several were injured).
A pipe bomb was placed outside the home of a party election worker in Bradden Place, in County Londonderry.  When the device was found, the fuse had been burned out.  Bomb experts were able to safely defuse the remnants of the device.
Three Qassam rockets were fired at the town of Sederot. One of the rockets hit a parking lot in an industrial zone. Some vehicles were destroyed and five people suffered from shock. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
Two Quds-1 rockets were fired at the Neve Deqalim settlement. No damage was reported. The military wing of the Islamic Jihad Movement claimed responsibility for the attack.
A Qassam rocket was fired at the Gadid settlement.  No damage was reported. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
Four policemen were ambushed while on patrol in Samarra. All four were killed in the attack.
A suicide bomb exploded near the party headquarters of the Iraqi National Accord Party, which is the party of Iraqi interim Prime Minister Ayad Allawi. The explosion killed two police officers and one civilian and injured twenty-five other people. Allawi was not inside the building at the time of the explosion.  On January 4, the militant group Jaish Ansar al-Sunnah claimed responsibility for the attack, citing the upcoming elections as their motivation.
A Qassam rocket was fired at the Sederot settlement. It exploded in an open field in a residential area, but caused no damage or casualties. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
Two mortars were fired at the Kfar Darom settlement. No damage was reported. The military wing of the Islamic Jihad movement claimed responsibility for the attack.
The Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) attacked and killed three voters, a sergeant major, a constable, and a woman, at the polls in Bihar. Five rifles and ammunition were looted from the post.  The CPN-M has called for a boycott of the election in Bihar and neighboring Jharkhand.
A former municipal council member in Baqubah city was killed by unknown gunmen. Thafir Sami was shot as he got into his car.
A Turkish truck driver was found dead near Baqubah. He was killed in an ambush while working under a contract with coalition forces.
A Qassam rocket was fired at the Nisanit settlement. No damage was reported. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
Two Qassam rockets were fired at the Elei Sinai settlement. No damage was reported. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
A rocket was fired at the Erez crossing. No damage was reported. The attack was reported on the website of the military wing of Fatah which said the attack was perpetrated by the Al-Nasir Salah-al-Din Battalions and the Martyr Ahmad Abu-al-Rish Brigades.
Three Turkomen from al-Qubbah who were working with US forces at the presidential palaces in Mosul were kidnapped. Ten days later, their bodies were found, beheaded in Mosul.
A suicide bomber exploded his vehicle outside a police academy and recruiting station in Hillah, south of Baghdad, as a graduation ceremeony was taking place. Police opened fire on the driver of the vehicle before the truck exploded. Twenty people, mostly police officers, were reported killed and at least twenty-five wounded. Nearby cars and buildings were also damaged in the explosion.
Two Qassam rockets landed in Sederot settlement. No damage was reported. One of the rockets landed in an industrial zone near Sapir College. The other landed inside Kibbutz Gevim, slightly damaging a building.
A fire was started at an Orange Order Hall in Strabane, in County Tyrone.  The fire was set at the front door of the hall and only caused minor damage.  This is the second attack on an Order Hall in the past few days, authorities are investigating whether the two are related.
Three Jordanian truck drivers, who worked to supply US troops according to a statement left by those who killed them, were killed by gunmen. Their bodies were found in al-Ramadi, with gunshot wounds to the head. The bodies were returned to Amman. They were identified as Nasser Hameed Suleiman Fawa'reh, Mohsen Ali Khaled Fawa'reh, and Khaleifah Zeidan Al Khaldi.
A police colonel and his driver were killed by armed assailants in Wajihia, east of Baqubah.
Maoists, assumed to be from the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M), abducted a Nepali Congress worker.  In the same day, assumed to be in coordination, Maoists abducted an ex-chairman of Loharpatti village (Mahottari district) and the chairman of the Itharwa village.  No demands have been made in the kidnapping and no casualties have been reported.
An official in the Iraqi Communist Party, Hadi Salih, was strangled with an electric wire at his home in Baghdad. Salih was in charge of foreign relations in the labor unions and has Swedish citizenship in addition to his Iraqi citizenship.
A mortar shell was fired at the Nisanit settlement. No damage was caused. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
Three mortars were fired at the Neve Deqalim settlement. No damage was caused. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
An armed group identifying itself as Al-Jihad claimed to have kidnapped two South Koreans in Iraq and threatened to kill them if South Korean troops were not withdrawn in 72 hours. No video images were released.
Palestinian gunmen fired at Jewish settlers traveling in a car near Nablus, killing one and wounding three of them. The military wing of al-Fatah claimed responsibility for the attack.
Unidentified gunmen blew up a pipeline used to transport gas from Kirkuk to Baghdad by placing an explosive charge near the pipeline. A large fire was caused at the scene of the explosion and the pipeline was damaged.
Five mortar shells were fired at the Netzer Hazani settlement. No damage was caused. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
Three people (a railway worker and two policemen) were injured when a bomb exploded at a train crossing in Yala province.  The bomb was detonated by digital clock and caused heavy damage to the train traffic control booth near the crossroad. The bomb was programmed to dontonate at the same time the policemen arrived to guard the booth.
Col Jasim al-Khirbit was killed by unknown gunmen in the center of Ramadi when gunmen found him and opened fire on him.
Two Spanish journalists for the publication El Pais, Carmen Secanella and Ramon Lobo, were abducted in Kahn Younis, in the southern Gaza Strip. The journalists were preparing to tour the refugee camp of Khan Younis when they were grabbed by group of militants. Known Palestinian militant groups have denied involvement. The journalists were held for two hours and then released.
A translator working with the US Army was killed when attackers broke into his home in Baqubah and beheaded him.
A voting center in the Gaza Strip, the Khauza'ah voting center, came under fire on the day of the Palestinian elections. No injuries were reported, but citizens were forced to go to voting centers in other areas.
Four schools, which were to be used as polling stations in Kirkuk was blown up.  No casualties were reported and no specific schools were mentioned in the report.
Three petroleum engineers were killed by gunmen who opened fire on them while they were on their way to work in Kirkuk. Oil fields and oil company employees in Kirkuk have become the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
A suicide bomber detonated his vehicle in the courtyard of a police station in southern Baghdad. Seven people were killed, including four police officers, and others injured. The attacker drove a police vehicle or a car that had been painted to resemble a police vehicle.
Two mortar shells were fired at the Kissufim settlement. No damage was reported. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
A party volunteer for interim Prime Minister Allawi's Iraqi National Accord party was killed in Baghdad by gunmen. He was one of three party members killed by attackers in two days.
A suicide bomber detonated his vehicle in front of the Interior Ministry in Basra. Several cars were damaged. One person was killed and seven injured.
Two mortar shells were fired at the Netzer Hazani settlement. No damage was reported, although the mortar shells did fall near a kindergarten and synagogue in the settlement. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
An explosion southwest of Kirkuk damaged several oil pipelines that run next to each other. The explosion caused a fire and disrupted oil flow.  This was one of two attacks on oil pipelines in Kirkuk on this day.
An official in the Iraqi National Accord Party was kidnapped. The group affiliated with Abu Musab al-Zarqawi claimed responsibility for the attack.
Five people, including two policemen, were wounded when a bomb detonated. The bomb was planted under a bench in front of a shop frequented by policemen in Yala province. Investigators believe the bombers were targeting police.  The injured were: Pol. Corp. Mawin Kado, Pol. Corp. Abubakar Dalaeman, Sunthari Pramotwimon, Samiya Awaekachi, Waeduding Waetae.
A Shiite cleric who worked in Ali al-Sistani's office in Najaf was found dead in the office. Halim al-Afghani was killed on the same day as another important al-Sistani aide.
Iraqi presidential candidate Mithal al-Alousiwas the target of a failed assassination attempt. Gunmen launched an attack on al-Alousi's home by throwing grenades at his house. His guards were able to repel the attack in a gun battle.  Al-Alousi supports normal relations with Israel and served under Ahmed Chalabi.
Bombers blew up the General Santos City public market, killing at least seventeen people and injuring seventy others.  The explosive device was made of TNT, nitrates and carbon and was activated by a cell phone.  Police originally detained four suspected Abu Sayaaf Group (ASG) members but lacked evidence to link them to the bombing.
A vehicle filled with explosives was found in Kfar Darom. A police helicopter fired at and destroyed the vehicle. Palestinian sources confirmed that the vehicle had been intended as a car bomb.
A pipeline linking oilfields in Kirkuk with the Dora refinery near Samarra was attacked with an explosive charge by insurgents. The explosion caused a fire and required that oil flow through the pipeline be halted.  Iraqi oil pipelines are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
Unknown assailants attacked a pipeline that runs to the al-Dora refinery with an explosive charge. The attack occurred near Samarra, caused a fire, and forced the oil company to stop oil pumping.
A car bomb exploded outside a Shiite mosque in the town of Khan Bani Said, near Baqubah, just as evening prayers were getting out. At least seven people were killed, including four police officers, and thirty-eight were wounded in the attack.
Gunmen opened fire on the headquarters of the Islamic weekly publication Al-Resala newspaper based in Gaza City, causing damage to the building. No injuries were reported.
A UNMIK (UN Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo) policeman from Nigeria was killed when a bomb attached to his car exploded.  The detonation was caused by a mobile phone.  The perpetrators are unknown.
Seven men who were trying to set up a mortar cannon near a mosque north of Baghdad were discovered by US forces.  The men were preparing to fire a mortar shell at the Abu Hanifah Mosque. US forces killed all seven of the terrorists and burned their vehicles.
The bodies of four Iraqi employees of a foreign contractor were found near Kut. Their names and the name of the company that employs them were not released.  The weapon used in the attack was not stated.
Two mortars were fired at the Morag settlement. No damage was reported. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
Three Palestinians trying to plant an explosive charge near the Ganey Tal settlement were discovered by Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) forces. IDF forces fired at the three men, hitting and killing one of them. The other two fled the scene.
The Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine and the military wing of the Islamic Jihad Movement claimed joint responsibility for an attack on the vehicles of Israeli settlers at the Kissufim crossing. One of the attackers was killed, as were two Israeli settlers. Other settlers were reported injured, though no number was given.
Three civilian trucks carrying supplies and military equipment were attacked north of Baquba. The trucks were headed towards a military base near the Turkish border when they were attacked by unknown gunmen using small arms fire and rocket propelled grenades. Two of the trucks were completely destroyed. At least one truck driver was reported missing.
A school in Basra that will be used as a voting site in the 30 January election was targeted by machine gun fire and RPGs. This was one of three schools/voting places to be attacked in Basra on this day.  The group affiliated with Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, Tanzim Qa'idat Al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn, claimed responsibility for this and the other two Basra polling station attacks.
An Egyptian truck driver was found dead in al-Ramadi with a note saying that he was killed because he was transporting goods for US troops. The man was identified as Ibrahim Muhammad Isma'il and officials said that he worked for a Kuwaiti company.  The weapon used in the attack was not stated.
A mortar was launched at a school in Mosul which was intended to be a polling place for the 30 January elections. The school was damaged,  but no injuries were reported.
Two police officers, including police captain Shakir Aboud, were killed when their car hit a roadside bomb in Numaniyah.
Two Quds-1 rockets were fired at the Netzarim settlement. The military wing of the Islamic Jihad Movement claimed responsibility for the attack. No casualties were reported. Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) forces returned fire following the rocket launches.
The Taliban carried out an attack on a pro-government cleric, Abdol Hay, at a mosque in Sar Marda village, near Tarin Kot (Urozgan Province).  The cleric and two of his students in the mosque were wounded.  The bomb was placed at the altar of the mosque in order to kill the cleric.  The attack has not yet been claimed.
A police station in Dour, near Tikrit, was attacked by gunmen. One policeman was killed and two injured in the attack.
Masked gunmen assassinated a Shiite who was running in the 30 January elections on the Constitutional Monarchy Movement ticket. Shaker Jabbar Sahl was killed in Baghdad.
Insurgents planted an explosive charge near an oil pipeline in Northern Iraq. The attack caused damage to the pipeline and interferred with efforts by the Oil Company to resume oil transport and exports along the frequently targeted oil pipeline through Turkey.
A suspected Muslim insurgent shot and injured Manavee Jae, the village headman of Ban Tae Dae, Narathiwat province.
Two Quds-1 rockets were fired at the Netzarim settlement. No damage was reported. The military wing of Islamic Jihad Movement claimed responsibility for the attack.
Three Qassam rockets were fired into an open area near Sederot settlement. No damage was reported in the attack.
Eight Chinese contractors, working for a Chinese contracting company that was helping to rebuild American bases, were taken hostage by an Iraqi militant group, identifying itself as the Islamic Resistance Movement and the al-Numan Brigades. The group released a video showing the workers holding their passports and gave the Chinese government 48 hours to declare that it would not allow any more of its citizens to work for Americans in Iraq.  On January 23, the men were released by their captors and received by Chinese officials in the Iraqi capital. The men were released when Chinese officials agreed not to send anymore of its nationals to Iraq.  The men were identified as Zhou Sunqin, Zhou Sunlin, Wei Wu, Lin Xiong, Chen Qinai, Lin Zhong, Lin Bin, and Lin Qiang.
Two explosive devices were found under the al-Zahrani Bridge in Lebanon. One device weighted 7kg and was attached to detonators. The second device had a wireless detonator and explosive charges weighing 3kg. The devices were both defused safely. Some officials speculated that the devices had been planted by Israelis.  It is not clear if the bridge was the intended target of the devices or if they were being stored for a later attack.
The Iraqi Homeland Party's headquarter in Al-Shirqat city was attack by mortars. Three people were wounded in the attack. The party is headed by Mishan al-Juburi, member of the Interim Iraqi National Assembly.
A Qassam rocket was fired at the Netzer Hazani settlement. No injuries were reported. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
Suspected militants set fire a bus stop in Yala's Bannang Sata district. No injuries were reported.  The attack on the bus stop occurred almost simultaneously with arson attacks on a school in Yala's Raman district and phone box in Yala's Bannang Sata district. Police believe the attacks were coordinated.
A small explosive charge detonated in a car parking lot in Bastia.  The explosive charge was left near the offices of the private company that manages the garage, which is on Saint-Nicolas Square.  No one was injured by the blast.
Five suicide bombings (although one targeted a military base) took place in Baghdad on a single day, killing a total of twenty-six people and wounding at least thirty. The blasts were all claimed by the group affiliated with Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, Tanzim Qa'idat Al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn. All of the blasts also involved checkpoints manned by soldiers or police officers, who have increasingly been the target of insurgent attacks. The first four attacks occurred within 90 minutes of each other, while the final attack occurred somewhat later.  The third bomb exploded at a checkpoint southwest of Baghdad International Airport, killing two Iraqi security guards and wounding three others.
The provincial governor of Dahuk, Governor Nejrivan Ahmed, was the target of an assassination attempt when a roadside bomb exploded near his convoy. Ahmed was not injured in the attack.
The convoy of workers from a British security firm, Janusian Security Risk Management, came under attack near Baiji. Two of the workers, one British and one Iraq (or Brazilian, sources were evenly split on the nationality of the second victim), were killed in the attack and a Brazilian worker is missing.  Ansar al-Sunnah Army and the Mujahideen Brigades claimed joint responsibility for the attack.
The brother of an Ugandan parliamentarian was killed by suspected Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) rebels in an attack on the MP's home. The local press is reporting that around a dozen rebels raided the home of parliamentarian Charles Angiro Gutmoi, killing his brother, David Livingstone Apunyo, in the process. The same rebels are suspected in the death of two others in the surrounding area later that same night.
Police received report of a bomb planted in front of a bank in Nuang District, Pattani province.  Police were able to diffuse the bomb, which was suspected of being planted by Muslim insurgents and believed to have targeted civilians.
A suicide car bomb exploded outside a Shiite mosque, the al-Taf mosque, just after morning prayers on the second day of a Muslim Holiday, Eid al-Adha. The attacked occurred in Baghdad and damaged several surrounding shops and buildings. At least fourteen people were killed in the attack and forty-two wounded.
A suicide bomber drove his ambulance into a crowd of Shiites celebrating their wedding near Youssifiyah, south of Baghdad. Twelve people were killed and sixteen wounded in the attack. The bride and groom were not among the victims.
A school in northern Iraq, intended to be used as a polling place in the upcoming election was attacked by gunmen using mortars and rockets.  This was one of four attacks like this on the same day. A total of two people were wounded.
A mortar shell was fired at the Gadid settlement. No damage or casualties were reported in the attack.
The Baloch Liberation Army has claimed responsibility for blowing up the railroad tracks during the Eid al-Adha festival.  The bomb went off near the University area shortly before a train was supposed to arrive from Karachi.  There were no casualties and traffic was disrupted for a few hours while repairs were made.
A school to be used as a polling center in Tikrit was blown up by insurgents. This was one of three polling center attacks in Tikrit on the same night.
Three employees working at the Oil Institute in Baiji were assassinated by gunmen while at work.
Mortar rounds and rocket fire were launched at a polling center in Tikrit. No casualties were reported, but damage to the building did occur. This was one of three attacks at polling centers in Tikrit on this day and one of dozens in Iraq over the weeks leading up to the Jan. 30 election.  The group linked with Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, Tanzim Qa'idat Al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn, claimed responsibility for this and other poll station bombing attacks.
The deputy governor of Diyala province was the target of an assassination attempt when a roadside bomb exploded near his car on the road to Baqubah. Ghassan al-Khadran escaped without injury, however, several of his bodyguards were injured.Note: Casualty number is approximate
The Al-Kazimiyah School, which was to be used as a polling station in the Jan. 30 elections in the town of al-Huwayjah, north of the Iraqi capital, was blown up by insurgents. No casualties were caused.
A power line between Diyala and Kirk Governorate was attacked by insurgents who used explosive devices to cause two electrical towers to fall. This is one of several attacks on power stations that has led to a reduction in power output to about 20% of capacity.
Azad Khan Baloch, of the Baloch Liberation Army, claimed the attack on the Civil Secretariat of Quetta which damaged the offices of three Balochistan ministers.  No casualties were reported.
A voting station in Tuz Khormatu was blown up using explosives. No casualties were caused, but damage to the building was reported. This was one of dozens of poll station attacks throughout Iraq in the weeks preceding the Jan. 30 election and one of four in this city on this day.  The group linked with Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, Tanzim Qa'idat Al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn, claimed responsibility for this and other poll station bombing attacks.
Police investigating a report of a possible car bomb in Baghdad were ambushed by insurgents. Seven police officers were killed in the attack.
Gunmen in a car fired at three employees from the Communications Ministry who were on their way to work in Baghdad. All three were seriously wounded.
A polling center for the Jan. 30 elections in the Salah-al-Din governorate was damaged by mortar shells. This was one of three attacks on polling centers in the Salah-al-Din governorate on this day. No casualties were reported in any of the attacks.
A school in Baghdad, the Al-Fursan school, to be used as polling center in the upcoming Jan. 30 election, was attacked by insurgents who threw detonated an explosive charge near the main gate. No injuries were reported in the attack. This was one of three bombings of poll stations in Baghdad on this day and one of dozens carried out throughout the country in the week preceding the election.
Two employees of the Trade Ministry were killed by gunmen in Baghdad.  No further information is available.
A translator working with US forces was killed by gunmen in Baghdad.  No further information is available.
Mortars and rockets were fired at a voting center in Ishaqi. No casualties were caused, but damage to the building was reported. This was one of dozens of poll station attacks throughout Iraq in the weeks preceding the Jan. 30 election.  The group linked with Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, Tanzim Qa'idat Al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn, claimed responsibility for this and other poll station bombing attacks.
Police Sgt Nukul Chairat of Bacho police station and his informant, Mada-oh Tanaemae, were shot and seriously wounded by motorcycle gunmen. Insurgents are suspected.
Gunmen attacked three political headquarters buildings in Baqubah, killing at least one police officer and wounding up to eight people. The group affiliated with Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, Tanzim Qa'idat Al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn, claimed responsibility for the attacks.  The first attack occurred when gunmen attacked a building that house the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan Party with machine gun fire.Note: Casualty numbers are for all three political party attacks together.
An explosive device, which had been planted in a plastic candy container, exploded as a group of middle school-aged children walked past it in Treviso.  The device had been packed inside a chocolate egg which typically contains a trinket for children.  None of the children were injured by the small blast.  Authorities are blaming this incident on the so-called Italian Unabomber who has been planting devices in food products in northern Italy for nearly a decade.  This blast occurred near the city's courthouse, and authorities believe it may have been intended to taunt investigators attempting to find the Unabomber.
Gunmen blew up a polling station in Tikrit. This was one of five polling stations blown up in Tikrit on this day and one of dozens blown up in the weeks preceding the election.
A Baghdad business man, Ahmed Hamodi al-Adhami, believed to be a spy for the interim government, was beheaded by insurgents in his real estate office.
The building of the electoral commission in Tikrit was attacked by gunmen, who opened fire on the building. Three people were injured in the attack.
A commander of the Leninsky district's guard police unit was wounded when he was shot as he was exiting his home in Grozny.  His assailants are unknown.
A polling station in Kirkuk was attacked by a grenade thrown by insurgents. No casualties were reported in the incident, although the building was damaged. This was one of three polling center bombings on this day in Kirkuk and one of dozens throughout the country in the lead up to the Jan. 30 elections.
Mortars were fired at a polling station in Samarra. No injuries were reported in the attack. This was one of five polling station attacks in this city on this day and one of dozens throughout the country in the lead up to the Jan. 30 elections.
Mortars were fired at a polling station in Baiji. No injuries were reported in the attack. This was one of two polling station attacks in this city on this day and one of dozens throughout the country in the lead up to the Jan. 30 elections.
In Mahmudiya, a car bomb targeting a police patrol killed three police officers and an Iraq soldier and wounded eleven others.  No further information was available.
A police officer was shot dead by gunmen in Kirkuk.  No further details were available.
Gunmen attacked a police station in the Taza district, south of Kirkuk, with mortars. Two civilians were injured in the attack, but no policemen were injured.
Insurgents attacked a school to be used as a polling station in the Jan. 30 election in Ramadi. One Iraqi national guard member who was guarding the polling station was killed in the attack. This is one of dozens of attacks on polling stations in the lead up to the election.
A polling station for the Jan. 30 election in Basra was damaged when an explosive device was detonated by insurgents. No injuries were reported. This was one of four polling station attacks in Basra on this day and one of dozens throughout the country in the lead up to the election.
Suspected Moro Islamica Liberation Front (MILF) rebels abducted, tortured, and killed a 17 year-old alleged asset of the military and police in Bitaras Sub-Village District, Cotabato City. The victim was identified as Taupi Ibrahim.
A bomb exploded at an election center in Mosul, causing heavy damage to the building, but no reported injuries.
A school in Baiji to be used as a polling station in the Jan. 30 elections was damaged by the detonation of an explosive device. No injuries were reported. This is one of three schools/polling stations attacked in Baiji on this day and one of dozens of attacks on polling centers in the lead up to the election.
In Zubair, south of Basra, a roadside bomb exploded near a police vehicle, killing one officer and wounding three others.
In Al-Ghazaliyah, the al-Nahrawn school, intended to be used as a polling station in the Jan. 30 elections, was attacked by mortar shells. The building was damaged. This is one of dozens of polling station attacks throughout the country in the lead up to the election.
An explosion occurred near the Dahuk University, mostly attended by Kurds in Dahuk. It was one of two explosions in Dahuk on this day. A total of four people were injured in both attacks.
Four police officers were shot dead on the road between Baiji and Shorgat by unidentified gunmen.
A Natural Gas Line supplying gas to Lahore was blown up by unknown assailants, cutting supply for a half a day.  No one claimed the attack and no casualties were reported.
There was an attack on a gas pipeline in Balloki.  The bombing affected the supply in Southern Lahore. No casualties were reported and the assailants are unknown.
A school in Baiji to be used as a polling station was attacked by an explosive device. The explosion damaged the building. This was one of nine polling station attacks on this day in Baiji, wounding a total of three Iraqis. Polling stations have become a top target of insurgents in the lead up to the Jan. 30 election.
A school in Baiji to be used as a polling station was attacked by an explosive device. The explosion damaged the building. This was one of nine polling station attacks on this day in Beiji, wounding a total of three Iraqis. Polling stations have become a top target of insurgents in the lead up to the Jan. 30 election.
An attack on a polling station in Diyala governorate by gunmen resulted in the death of one police officer. Polling stations have become the frequent target of insurgent attacks in the lead up to the election.
A polling station was attacked in Iraq by insurgents. This was one of dozens of attacks throughout Iraq in the lead up to the Jan. 30 election.
A polling station was attacked in Iraq by insurgents. This was one of dozens of attacks throughout Iraq in the lead up to the Jan. 30 election.
A voting center in Baiji was hit by mortar rounds, wounding four guards. Voting centers have become frequent targets of attacks in the lead up to the January 30 elections.
A polling station in Baghdad was attacked by gunmen.This was one of several attacks in Baghdad on polling stations on this day and one of dozens in the lead up to the Jan. 30 elections. Three polling center attacks in northern Baghdad wounded five national guard members in total.
The Communist Party Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) attacked a family who were gathered in Sungure in the Yamkha village.   The threw a socket bomb at the family, killing one child and injuring a woman and another child. The identity of the family was unknown.
An explosion targeting a polling station occurred in Basra. A number of peole were wounded and killed in the attack, although sources did not report specific numbers. This is one of several polling station attacks in Iraq on election day claimed by the group led by Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, Tanzim Qa'idat Al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn.
A polling station in Mosul was attacked with mortars and rockets. No casualties were reported in this incident. This is one of several polling station attacks in Iraq on election day claimed by the group led by Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, Tanzim Qa'idat Al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn.
An incendiary device was found in a supermarket on Branch Road in Strabane.  Authorities are calling the device viable and removed it for investigation.  This attack is being blamed on dissident republicans, who have been planting fire bombs in businesses all over the area for about a month.
Four voters who had just left a polling station in Baghdad were killed by insurgents who threw grenades at them, after identifying them by their ink-stained fingers.
A suicide bomber detonated himself near the al-Shouhada polling center in southwestern Baghdad. One person was killed and an unknown number wounded. This was one of eight suicide bombings in Baghdad on election day and one of thirteen throughout the country. The group affiliated with Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, Tanzim Qa'idat Al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn, claimed responsibility for all thirteen bombings as well as some other attacks on this day. In total, about forty people were killed in election related bombings.
A bus carrying people to vote near Hilla was blown up by an explosive device. The explosion killed three people and wounded fourteen others.
A mortar round landed in the al-Rasafi polling center in Balad, killing a woman and her son and wounding another civilian. This was one of several polling station attacks in Iraq on election day, claimed by the group led by Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, Tanzim Qa'idat Al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn.
The deputy governor of Mosul, Khasraw Goran, survived an assassination attempt when his convoy hit a explosive device planted along the side of the road. One bodyguard was killed in the attack and the another wounded.
A Qassam rocket was fired at the Gadid settlement. No injuries were caused in the attack, but one home was damaged. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility and stated that the attack (and others on the same day) were retaliation for the death of a 10-year-old Palestinian girl from Israel Defense Forces tank fire while she was on the grounds of a UN school in Gaza.
A 50kg bomb was found near the Kissufim checkpoint but was defused, before it exploded, by Border Police.
A bomb exploded Tuesday in the northern Iraqi town of Arbil near the home of a top Kurdish political official in the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan party, Adnan Mofti. Two guards who noticed the bomb before it exploded, tried to defuse it, and were killed in the attack.  Mofti was not hurt.
The Balochistan Liberation Army claimed responsibility for the bomb attacks in Sibbi which targeted an electricity tower.  This was the last source of power (two other power transmission lines were destroyed earlier in the month).  There is a photo attached to the article which shows casualties.  However, no specific casualty numbers are mentioned.  In addition there was an explosion on the same day, also claimed by the Baloch Liberation Army, targeting a railway line.  This is presumed to be a coordinated attack.
Arsonists set fire to a van belonging to the Kiss FM radio station, in Marousi.  An unidentified man claimed responsibility on behalf of a group calling themselves Communists Liberation Faction.  In his statement of claim, he said, following the famous terrorism law of the, by euphemism, socialist PASOK, New Democracy is now attempting to safeguard legally as well, the sector of collective responsibility, which is of a fascist inspiration, having as its ultimate purpose the establishment of an atmosphere of terrorism-hysteria and the preparation of the ground for the control of even more reactionary and hard enactments that will limit the individual rights and freedoms.  The same group claimed responsibility for an attack on the Khalandri Tax Office.
Sutham Sukpaiboon, a teacher at Ban Bueng Nam Sai School in Yala province's Raman district, was shot by two motorcycle gunmen on his way home from work. He later died in the hospital from his injuries. Sutham was also chairman of a polling station.
Twelve Iraqi National Guard recruits were killed when insurgents stopped their bus near Kirkuk, forced the men off the bus, and killed them one by one. Two recruits were allowed to go free, but were ordered by the attackers to warn others not to join the National Guard. The attackers identified themselves at Takfir wa Hijra, an extreme Islamic group. Recent attacks on Army recruits has hurt the development of a strong Iraqi security force.
Magomed Omarov, the deputy interior minister of Dagestan, was assassinated by armed attackers as he was traveling in Makhachkala.  His convoy of two cars was overtaken by two model-99 VAZ cars, and Omarov and four of his bodyguards were killed in their cars by automatic weapons fire.  One bodyguard was taken to a nearby hospital in critical condition.  This attack comes amid a crackdown in the republic of radical Wahhabi Muslims.  In the crackdown, the government has labeled many individuals Wahhabis if they do not practice their religion in one of the government-approved mosques.
Two civlians were shot dead by gunmen in Balad. Officials said that they were killed because they had voted in the Jan. 30 election.
A police convoy was ambushed by gunmen in Baghdad. Five police officers and an Iraqi National Guard member were killed in the attack.
The railroad tracks of Pakistan Railways (in Mastung) were damaged when a explosion near the tracks in Killi Wali Khan (Quetta-Zehdan section) blew up part of the track.  The traffic is continuing on an alternate track. The assailants are unknown.  No casualties were reported and repair work was started.
The brother of Mosul police chief, General Ahmed al-Jubouri, was kidnapped in Mosul following a threat made by al-Jubouri to insurgents, to destroy their sanctuaries if the rebels did not turn in their weapons. One day later al-Jubouri's brother was freed in a raid by Mosul police. Several suspects were arrested in the raid as well.
A member of Iraq's intelligence service was killed in a drive-by shooting in Baghdad.  No further information is available.
Unknown assailants attacked the railroad tracks in Nushki (line from Zahidan-Iran to Quetta) The train from Zahidan had passed several hours prior to the explosion.  There was damage to the tracks, but no casualties were reported.
Insurgents attacked a convoy of three trucks hauling cars (18 Kias) that were to be used by the Ministry of Interior. The vehicles/cargo was destroyed and the drivers were kidnapped. Insurgents used rocket-propelled grenades and small arms fire in the attack.  The attack took place in al-Souaira.
Insurgents attacked a police station south of Baghdad in Mahaweel using firearms. The resulting gun battle left seventeen Iraqi police officers, five National Guard members, and fourteen attackers dead.
The Urban Hit Squad of New People's Army (NPA) claimed responsibility for the killing of a public market administrator of Malabon.  The group is called the Armed Partisan Operatives of the Marxist-Leninist Party of the Philippines. The group claimed that the administrator was killed for abusing authority and torturing several children accused of petty theft.
Several mortar shells were fired at the police station in Mosul. However, they missed their target and killed three civilians who were nearby.
A mortar shell was fired at the Neve Deqalim settlement in Gaza Strip. The shell exploded in the yard of a house, but no injuries were caused.
A car full of journalists came under armed attack while driving in Wana. The perpetrators are unknown.  Two journalists, including one from the Pakistani station Khyber TV, were killed.  Two other journalists, one from Al-Jazeera and one from AFP, were injured.  Dilawar Khan Wazir, a journalist from the Urdu section of the BBC was present, but unharmed.
Two Iraqis who work for US forces were found dead in Tikrit.  The weapon used in the killings is unknown.
Rosapaing Mausao, a provincial defense volunteer was shot and killed by suspected insurgents in Rangae district, Narathiwat province.
The Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) claimed responsibility for a large car bombing in Madrid, that injured forty-two people.  The device, which consisted of approximately fifty kilos of explosives, detonated outside a convention center where Spanish King Juan Carlos and Queen Sofia were to inaugurate a major art show later in the day.  Mexican President Vincente Fox was also scheduled to appear at the show.  A caller, claiming to be from ETA warned the media of an attack at 9:00 am, the bomb exploded at 9:30.  Out of the forty-two injuries, only about twenty-four were considered serious.  This attack also took place on the same day that authorities arrested thirteen suspected members of ETA elsewhere in Spain.
An Iraqi TV journalist, Abdul-Hussein Khazal, who works for the Al-Hurra pan Arab television station, a US government funded station founded in February 2004, was killed along with his four-year old son when gunmen attacked his car in Basra. Khazal's driver was also injured in the attack. Khazal also worked for the governor's press service and was a member of the Shiite political party Dawa.  A previously unknown group, calling itself the Brigades of Imam al-Hassan al-Basri, claimed responsibility for the attack.
A female council worker in Mahmudiyah was kidnapped by unknown gunmen.  No information on her whereabouts is known.
A Palestinian gunmen attacked the vehicle of an Israeli settler in the West Bank. No one was injured. This was one of two such attacks on this day.
A car bomb targeting a police patrol exploded in Baghdad. Five Iraqi police officers were wounded in the blast.  The car bomb was triggered by a remote-control.
Dozens of mortars and Qassam rockets were fired at the Neve Deqalim settlement, one of two settlements to come under attack during the same time period. The attacks on the two settlements together included thirty-six mortar shells and twenty homemade rockets. No injuries were caused in the attack. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for this attack and said it and the other attacks launched on this day were in retaliation for the death of two Palestinians at the hands of Israel Defense Forces troops the day before.  The attack comes as Palestinian leader Abbas and Israeli Prime Minister Sharon have agreed to a cease fire and threatens to derail recent progress towards peace.
Thirty mortars and rockets were fired at the Gush Katif settlement. This attack comes on a day when Palestinian groups have fired over fifty mortars and rockets at Israeli settlements. No injuries were caused in the attack. The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for this attack and said it and the other attacks launched on this day were in retaliation for the death of two Palestinians at the hands of Israel Defense Force troops the day before.  The attack comes as Palestinian leader Abbas and Israeli Prime Minister Sharon have agreed to a cease fire and threatens to derail recent progress towards peace.
Insurgents attacked a police patrol in Salman Pak, southeast of Baghdad, with mortars and gunfire. The attack led to a prolonged gun battle, killed at least fourteen police officers and wounded up to sixty-five others. Surrounding cars were said to be on fire following the attack. The patrol had been on a search for illegal weapons. One source reported that police had been taunting Sunni cowards on loud-speakers right before the attack. Insurgents briefly took over a police station during the attack, but were eventually repelled.
Gunmen killed a Sunni imam, who worked for an endowment that handles funds for mosques, and his son south of Baghdad. The bodies were found dumped on a highway.
Arsonists set fire to a school building in Narathiwat's Janae district. Firefighters tried to stop the blaze, but the attack destroyed the building.
A convoy of settlers near Kissufim Crossing were fired upon by Palestinians. The attack was claimed by the military wing of Islamic Jihad in Palestine. The group said that the attack caused casualties among the settlers.
A group of unidentified perpetrators threw several incendiary devices at the Health Ministry building in San Sebastian.  The devices caused minor damage to the front door of the premises, but there were no reported injuries.
Seven arson attacks, perpetrated with fire bombs, were carried out around the city of Athens.  All of the devices were made of gas canisters and flammable liquid, and occurred within 25 minutes of each other.  The fourth attack occurred at a branch of a Eurobank on Alexandras and Asklipiou Junction (city not named).  Only minimal damages were caused.  On 13 February, a caller claimed responsibility for this attack, stating, we carried out the barrage of attacks at the same time that the state and the police were showing their strength through the Urban Plan in order to express solidarity with anarchist Polikarpos Yeoryiadhis who will be put on trial on 16 February in Serres.
A bomb exploded at a video shop in Muang district, Yala province. Suspected separatists first broke into the shop and shot its owner. The bomb was detonated when police arrived on the scene to investigate the shooting. One police officer was killed and  twenty-five people, including residents, police, and soldiers, were injured in the blast.
Six Kurdish security guards were found shot dead in Mosul. Security forces in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
A branch of the Eghnastias Bank in Palaio Faliro was attacked by unknown arsonists.  A caller claimed responsibility for the attack, stating, yesterday's attack on Eghnatia Bank in Palaio Faliro was carried out as an expression of solidarity with Polikarpos Yeoryiadhis.  Freedom to us all.  Only minor damage was caused to the premises.
A fertilizer-laden explosive device was found, undetonated, outside the Placer County courthouse in Auburn, California.  The device had been lit but was discovered before the explosive could detonate.  This attack comes amid a string of arson attacks in California that have been perpetrated by eco-terrorists.  It is unclear if this bombing is related to the earlier attacks.
A member of the Communist Party in Iraq and the Baqubah Municipal Council, Fadil Aziz, was assassinated by gunmen in Baqubah.
Eight Iraqi contractors who worked for the US military were kidnapped while driving home in a small bus from a US military base in Balad. Three days later they were found dead in the Balad area.
A homemade explosive device blew up on a road in Makhachkala as a group of policemen on patrol passed by in their jeep.  None of the policemen were hurt.  The explosion occurred at about 1:00 AM local time.  The explosion had a yield of about 300-500 grams of TNT.  The perpetrators are unknown.
A pipeline in that supplies oil to a power station in the city of Dibbis, near Kirkuk, was attacked with an explosive device. The blast caused a significant fire and disrupted the provision of power to surrounding areas. This was one of three attacks on nearby pipelines on this day. Oil pipelines are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
An oil pipeline in Kirkuk was damaged by an explosive device, causing a significant fire. This was one of three attacks on oil/gas pipelines in this area within this time frame. Oil pipelines are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
The Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG) claimed responsibility for three near simultaneous attacks on Manila, General Santos City, and Davao.  In Maktaki City, the business district of Manila, an explosion at approximately 7:50pm on a bus at a commuter terminal near a crowded mall killed six and injured at least seventy-four. The dead were identified as Jose Marie Balboa, Bernardo de la Cruz Rizarito, and an unidentified female. A total of at least thirteen were killed and 140 injured in the three attacks.  ASG claimed they carried out the bombings in retaliation for alleged abuses of the military during missions against Muslim rebels.  One week after the attacks, two suspects were arrested in Mandaluyong in connection with this attack.  Gamal Baharan and Abu Khalil Trinidad are both believed to be members of ASG.  Trinidad is being accused of being the guy who devised the bomb.  Both Baharan and Trinidad reportedly made confessions to news reporters.  In late March 2005, Philippines authorities arrested a man they would only identify as 'Rohmat,' a member of Jemaah Islamiyah (JI) that they believe was also involved in these Valentines Day bombings.  Authorities believe Rohmat may have ordered and financed these attacks.
Suspected insurgents detonated a bomb on a road running parallel to a railway, 200 meters away from the Joh I Rong train station. The bomb injured four officers patrolling the area. The injured were identified as Sgt-Major Sakchai Yodharn, Lt. Supoj Yimnoi, and privates Narongdej Thongdee and Ratn Karnsawas.  A second bomb exploded 30 minutes after the first and was intended to injure officials responding to the scene.  Two students from an Islamic school were arrested in connection with these two attacks.
A bomb targeting a police patrol exploded in Baghdad, killing one police officer and a civilian and wounding another officer.
Jassim Mohammed Mousa al-Daraji, a former municipal officer and an ex-Baath party member, was killed in Sadr City by gunmen.
An Israeli settler was wounded when Palestinians threw rocks at his car near the Teqoa settlement.
Members of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) shot and killed the mayor of Genova, Jose Heriberto Castro Toro. Castro was inspecting a construction site when the attack took place. The mayor's bodyguard and driver were also killed in the attack. It is believed that the mayor had received death threats, and was also noted that his predecessor was killed last year, and a candidate for mayor of Genova was killed in 2003.
Gunmen seriously wounded a police colonel and killed his driver when they attacked the police officers vehicle in Mosul.
Two police officers were killed by gunmen in Kirkuk.  No further information is available.
A police patrol in Baqubah was fired on by insurgents. One police officer was killed and two insurgents were killed when officers returned fire.
The former leading member of the Iraqi National Congress and the head of the Iraqi Ummah Democratic Party, Mithal al-Alusi, was the target of an assassination attempt. Gunmen attacked his home in Baghdad, but Alusi was not injured in the attack. Recently, al-Alusi lost his two sons and bodyguard when his vehicle was attacked by gunmen.
An assassination attempt was made on Dagestan's Deputy Prime Minister.  A bomb consisting of about five to seven kilograms of TNT and packed with nuts and bolts was placed in a Zhiguli parked outside the Kizlyar local government building.  The bomb detonated at about 5:20 PM local time as Deputy Prime Minister Amuchi Amutinov was passing by in a motorcade.  The perpetrators are unknown.  Three passers-by, including a woman and a driver, were killed, and four people were wounded, two of whom were riding in an escort car.
A suspect, that authorities identified as Faisal, was apprehended carrying two hand grenade and a pistol, as he attempted to enter the Punjabi Shiite Mosque (Alamdar Road-Quetta), while the congregation was present for prayers.  It was reported that the suspect had the intention of carrying out a suicide attack.
A mortar shell was fired at a Israeli settlement in South Gaza Strip. No injuries or damages were reported in the attack.
Separatists responded to the government's drastic shift in security policy by detonating a car bomb in front of a restaurant and the Marina Hotel in Narathiwat province.  A least six were killed and fifty injured.  This is the first car bomb to occur in Thailand, and the attack occurred just one day after a visit to the province by Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra.  As of February 20, 2005, Thai police had arrested Habisa Jeduere as a suspect. However, they released him after interrogation, concluding that he was not likely involved in the attack.  In April 2005, police arrested Yering Samae and Marohsuran Naebenae in connection to this attack and fifteen others.
Two anti-tank rounds were fired on the office of the Nazran police chief, Dzhabrail Kostoyev.  Kostoyev was not in the office, and no one was injured.  The office was fired on from a nearby building under construction.  The perpetrators are unknown.
A suicide bomber detonated himself at an Iraqi police and National Guard checkpoint in a Sunni neighborhood in Baghdad. Two police offciers and a national guard member were killed in the attack.
Unknown perpetrators threw a firebomb at an office of the Justice and Development Party (AK) in Kocaeli.  There were no reported injuries, but minor damage was caused to the building.  Two people were seen fleeing from the scene after the attack.
A small bomb exploded in Yala province, injuring 2 soldiers who were providing protection for local teachers.
A firecracker bomb exploded in San Martin de Teverga, slightly after another bomb was discovered in the region.  This device was left outside an office of the Spanish Socialist Workers' Party (PSOE), and broke the main door of the premises.  Police found a note written at the scene of the blast with criticism of the future European constitution.  Authorities believe that this attack and the earlier one in Llanera were the work of Asturian nationalist groups.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives near an academic building in Kadhimiya, although he killed no one in his attack.  This was one of eight suicide bombings on this day, although some were aimed at National Guard targets. In total fifty-four people were killed in violence in Iraq on the Ashura holiday.
A suicide bomber drove his scooter into a tent filled with Sunnis attending the funeral of a woman who died of old age. The attack killed six people and wounded as many as fifty-five. Among those killed were the womans husband and two older sons.  This was one of eight suicide bombings on this day, although some were aimed at National Guard targets. In total fifty-four people were killed in violence in Iraq on the Ashura holiday.
Luder Belayo, a former barangay captain of Tubo-Tubo, and Joey Abraham, a council member of the same village, were shot and killed by a lone gunman as they returned from a meeting with military officers in Barangay Pinulot. The gunman is believed to be a member of the Rebolusyonaryong Hukbong Bayan (RHB), a breakaway group of the New People's Army (NPA). The motive for the attack is unknown.
Two policemen in charge of protecting a power generating company in Baiji were killed by unknown gunmen who attacked the power plant to sabotage it.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) released an internet communiqu on 26 February accepting responsibility for a car bomb attack against RCN radio and TV carried out in Cali on 20 February.  A Renault 4 exploded in front of RCN offices at 10:15 pm after two perpetrators, one who was driving the Renault 4 and one driving a motorcycle, fled the scene.  Seventy percent of the building was destroyed and a security guard and audio operator were injured, but no one was killed.  In the statement the FARC explained that they targeted RCN because it was a sounding board for the Armys black propaganda and had taken an active part in the conflict by transmitting government anti-insurgency propaganda.
Authorities discovered an explosive mine left in the Zor Market in Khost.  It is unclear who may have planted the device, but authorities believe it may have been the work of enemies of Afghanistan.  No further information is provided.
Three contractors who build US military camps were kidnapped by gunmen in Iraq. The group holding them identified themselves as the Al-Ahwal Brigades and said they were affiliated with the Islamic Army in Iraq. One of the men kidnapped was identified as a Turkish national, but the nationalities of the other two men and the identities of the men were not released. The Brigades said that they would kill the men.
Four security personnel at the Baiji Oil refinery were killed when gunmen fired mortars on an oil derivatives distribution complex at the refinery.
Makta Towae-ayee, village head of Ibatu village in Sungai Padi district, Narathiwat, was shot dead. Two defence volunteers, Muhammad Nustori Masakelent and Sufanni Masakeleng, were also seriously injured in the gun attack.
Gunmen in two cars attacked the al Rasul al-Akram Mosque, a Shiite mosque, in the al-Ghazaliyah neighborhood of Baghdad. They attempted to fire an RPG at the mosque, but it did not explode. The mosques security personnel fired back at the gunmen, killing one of them. One security guard was also killed in the attack. The attackers fled the scene on foot.
A bomb went off in Takae village, Yaring district, Pattani province beside a cemetary where police were investigating a murder.  The explosive device was triggered by a cell phone shortly after the police arrived on the scene.
A bomb exploded outside the offices of the Fifth Republic Movement party (MVR) in Zulia.  The explosion took place early in the morning and no one was injured.  The explosion damaged a station wagon belonging to MVR regional coordinator Maria De Queipo.  It is unknown who carried out the attack or what motivated it.
An Iraqi police checkpoint west of Kirkuk came under armed attack by gunmen. Several policemen were injured in the attack, but the exact number of injuries was not reported.
Two grenade attacks targeted the residences of an appeals court judge and a chief prosecutor. No one was injured in the incidents.  The first attack occurred at the home of the appeals court judge, and was followed by a scattering of hand-written leaflets condemning an on-going strike by the judges.
A police convoy was ambushed by a roadside bomb near Kirkuk. The target of the attack appeared to have been the police chief of Kirkuk who was traveling in the convoy. Col. Khattab Omar Aref was not injured in the attack, however, two police officers were killed and four wounded in the attack, all of whom were his bodyguards.
The Governor of Ninawa Directorate, Durayd Kashmulah, was the target of an assassination attempt when gunmen attacked a social hall in Mosul where Kashmulah was offering condolences on the death of one of his relatives. Kashmulah was not injured in the attack, but two of his guards were injured.
A bomb exploded outside the main entrance of the Foreign Relations Ministry at 5:00 am.  The device was wrapped like a present and placed at the door.  The door and structure around it were damaged and a glass partition was broken by the blast.  It is unknown who carried out the attack or what motivated it.
A police officer in Baqubah was shot by gunmen as he returned home from work.
An explosive device detonated at a gendarmerie squad building in Ponte-Leccia, on the island of Corsica.  There was only minor damage caused and no reported injuries.
A group calling itself the Liberating Communist Faction claimed responsibility for attacking an office of the Social Security Institution (IKA) in Marousi.  It is unknown what type of weapon was used in the attack.  In their statement of claim, the group states, we symbolically attacked the IKA accounts department at Marousi, as an expression of protest at the continuing- despite our continuous appeals- of Mitsos Aivatzidhis, a former comrade of ours, who is giving battle to discontinue his dependence on narcotics.
A roadside bomb exploded by four soldiers and eight teachers on their way to school in Narathiwat province.  The soldiers were driving the teachers to school in a pickup when the bomb went off about ten meters in front of them. No one was injured.
A car bomb exploded in parking lot where intercity transportation cars are parked in Musayyab. The bomb appeared to have targeted several nearby police officers. Five people were wounded in the attack, including two policemen.
Two government workers were kidnapped by unknown gunmen on the road between Latifiya and Mahmoudiya, south of Baghdad. Many people have been kidnapped recently in this area.  No further information on the whereabouts of the victims was available.
A roadside bomb exploded in Baghdad, killing one police officer.  No further information is provided.
Two bombs were found and defused by Russian federal forces on roads in the Nozhay-Yurtovskiy district.  No one was injured.  The perpetrators are unknown.
Four rudimentary bombs detonated in Milan and Genoa within hours of each other.  The first blast took place outside the Pra Carabinieri barracks in the Piazza Scesa, in Genoa.  The device, like the other three, was placed in a trash bin next to the station and completely destroyed the bin.  The device was made of a pressure cooker filled with chlorate and linked to a 12-volt battery.  The Informal Anarchist Federation claimed responsibility for all four bombs and stated that it wanted police to pull out of certain neighborhoods and also stated continued support for a resurgent Red Brigades group.
A group of militants attacked the Sunzha police station in southern Chechnya.  One policeman was killed and seventeen were wounded.  Five of the attackers were killed and seven were captured.   The police were warned of the attack in advance by jailed insurgents.  A policeman was detained as a possible suspect.  Officials blame Doku Umarov's insurgent group for the attack.
An investigative judge, Moayad Hamed Al-Jader, who works in Eastern Baghdad, was shot by gunmen who fired on his vehicle as he left his courthouse. This was the second judge to be killed on this day. Officials consider judges to be targets because they are seen to collaborate with the government.  Al-Jader was killed in the attack and one of his guards was injured.
Six police officers were killed in a set of coordinated attacks in Baghdad.  A second police patrol responding to the shooting death of a police officer and the subsequent ambush of the first investigating patrol were targeted with a roadside bomb. The explosion of the bomb killed three officers.
Malee Hayeehamu, headman of tambon Erawan in Waeng district, Narathiwat province, was killed by gunmen as he drove a pick-up truck carrying four assistant village heads.  Three other village heads, Sainung, Arlee Usman, and Arshi Ma-arong, were seriously wounded.
A suicide bomber detonated his vehicle outside the headquarters for the Iraqi emergency police in Baqubah, killing one person and wounding at least eighteen others, including five policemen. Officials believe the target of the attack was Mudhafar Shahab Jiburi, chief of the police agency in Diyala province, whose convoy was near by at the time.  The group affiliated with Abu Musab al-Zarqawi,Tanzim Qa'idat Al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn, claimed responsibility for the attack.
An Israeli motorcyclist was wounded when Palestinians threw stones at him on the Jerusalem-Modin highway near the village of Khirbat al-Masbah. Several cars were also damaged by stones.
A Molotov cocktail and paint missiles were thrown at an election stand of a National Alliance (AN) candidate in Vittoria.  Witnesses saw two men running from the scene of the attack.  No claim of responsibility was made, but police arrested one man in connection with the attack.
Gunmen assassinated the police chief of the Al-Budayr District Police Force in Al-Qadisiyah Governorate. Col. Gha'ib Hattab was shot by gunmen near his house. One woman was also injured in the attack.
The railroad tracks in Dera Ghazi Khan were blown up by unknown assailants.  There was a train (Chaltan Express to Quetta) that was scheduled to pass, but no casualties were reported.
A motorcycle with explosives attached exploded outside of a restaurant and bakery in Baghdad, wounding four people. No information on the perpetrator was available.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol exploded in Tikrit, wounded three police officers and killed an Iraqi soldier.
A former member of the Ninawa provincial council was killed when gunmen opened fire on him north of Baghdad.
A man and his granddaughter were killed when their jeep exploded outside Lejanias.  The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) stopped the jeep at a checkpoint, loaded it with explosives, and then forced the man to drive the vehicle into town.  The jeep exploded before reaching Lejanias killing the man and child.  It is not know what the intended target was.
A police officer, Sgt. Maj. Faroug Musaab was killed when gunmen opened fire on him in Baghdad. He received gunshot wounds to the back.
A police official who worked in the Interior Ministry's immigration department, Major General Ghazi Mohammed, was shot dead by gunmen in Baghdad in a drive-by shooting. The group affiliated with Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, Tanzim Qa'idat Al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn, claimed responsibility for the attack.
An explosive device detonated in Diyarbakir, near the mayor's office, injuring three people.  The attack took place on Lise Avenue in the Yenisehir district of the city.  No further information is provided.
A convoy of Interior Ministry trucks carrying food for the Trade Ministry in Salman Pak was attacked by gunmen southeast of Baghdad. Three civilians were killed in the attack and at least one of the trucks was set on fire and destroyed.
A group of unknown gunmen fired at least seven shots at a police barracks in Corte, in northern Corsica.  Seven bullet holes were found on the faade of the police building.  This was one of two attack on the island of Corsica on this day.
Police sergeant Winai Phetmaneee was killed on his way to work in Sungai Padi district, Narathiwat province.
Two suicide bombers blew up a large garbage truck in front of the Al-Sadir Hotel used by foreigners and contractors and the Agriculture Ministry building. The Ministry building was set on fire by the explosion and about twenty cars were severely damaged.  The bombers were able to gain access to the compound housing the two buildings after a group of gunmen wearing police uniforms shot two guards at the checkpoint. Guards shot at the vehicle to prevent a large explosion, but failed to prevent the suicide bombers. At least four people were killed and forty wounded in the attack, including thirty American contractors.  The group affiliated with Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, Tanzim Qa'idat Al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn, claimed responsibility for the attack.  On March 21, the US military reported that it had captured ten men who admitted planning and carrying out the attack.
A female translator who worked with the US army, Nawal Muhammad, was assassinated by unknown gunmen in Kirkuk.
A time bomb was found at the Abhayapuri police station.  The assailant is unknown.  The bomb expert attending the incident was killed when the bomb exploded.  A police officer  accompanying the bomb expert was also injured.  The United Liberation Front of Assam is suspected.
There was a bombing of two electric transformers in Dhubri by unknown assailants.  No casualties were reported.  The United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) is suspected by the police.
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) rebels attacked three villages in northwestern Uganda, killing six and injuring sixteen more. A government official that saw the bodies described them as having been bludgeoned to death, perhaps with hoes or other similar tools. The same official noted that among those killed were both children and adults.
Gen. Abdul Karim Raheem, a senior police official in the Iraqi Interior Ministry was attacked by gunmen in Baghdad. He was critically wounded in the attack.
A suicide bombing occurred during a funeral in Mosul. The explosion occurred in the courtyard of the under-construction Shahedayein Mosque while the funeral was going on. The funeral was for a professor at Mosul University, Mahmoud al-Aaraji. At least fifty-three people were killed in the attack and over 100 wounded.  A Sunni militant group calling itself the Soldiers of the Prophet's Companions claimed responsibility for the attack which it said was the group's first action and was intended to stop the flood of Shiites in Muslim countries.
An Iraqi contractor, Farhan Sa'di,  who works with coalition forces was found shot to death near al-Dujail city.
A bomb was thrown at an Albanian-owned house in the mostly Serb-dominated northern area of Kosovska Mitrovica.  The explosion occurred at 11 pm in the area of Kosovska Mitrovica known as Mikro Naselje.  The house was slightly damaged, and no one was hurt.  The owner was in Germany at the time.  The perpetrators are unknown.
Two American security contractors who worked for Blackwater Security Consulting, which provides security for the US Embassy in Baghdad, were killed when a roadside bomb exploded next to their vehicle south of Baghdad. A third American employee of the firm was wounded in the attack.
A Christian cameraman, Hussam Hilal Sarsam, working for Kurdistan Satellite TV was kidnapped near his home by unknown gunmen. His body was found the next day in Mosul.
A small explosive device detonated in a church during mass, in the northern town of Motta di Livenza, injuring three people.  The device had been planted inside an electric candle and seriously injured a 6-year-old girl as she inserted a coin into the machine.  Authorities believe that this may be the work of the so-called, Italian Unabomber who has been planting such devices all over Italy for about a decade.
The convoy of the director general of the Iraq Health Ministry was attacked by a roadside bomb in Baghdad. Sa'ad al-Amily, the director general, was not in the convoy at the time, which was heading to his home to pick him up. Five of Amily's bodyguards were wounded in the attack.
A pipeline that transports oil from Kirkuk to a refinery in Beiji was damaged and set on fire when unidentified men placed an explosive device near the pipeline and detonated it. Oil pipelines are the frequent target of insurgent attacks in Iraq.
Wassam Awzi, the son-in-law of former Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz, was kidnapped in Baghdad. About two months later, he was released by his captors.Note: Kidnapping date is approximate.
Gunmen assassinated a senior police officer, the director of the Internal Affairs Department in Kirkuk. Brigadier General Waiil Usuf Yaqub was shot by gunmen on his way home from work. The gunmen left his body in his car and fled the scene.
Rangsri Jindarat, the headmaster of a school in Saiburi district Pattani province, was murdered by two gunmen as he drove along the Pattani-Narathiwat road.
A bomb exploded in front of the motorcade of Anatoly Chubais, head of Russia's United Energy System (UES).  No one was hurt in the blast partially because the motorcade was armored and the bomb was faced the wrong way, into the forest and not the highway.  Chubais is disliked in Russia because of his association with Russia's privatization scheme in the 1990s.  A former special intelligence colonel from the GRU (Main Intelligence Directorate) named Vladimir Kvachkov was detained on suspicion of involvement with the bombing.
A policeman was killed on the Chervlennaya-Argun highway when his car was fired on.  He died at the scene.  The perpetrators are unknown.
Two trains, which were traveling in opposite directions, were attacked in Pakistan.  The two attacks are assumed to be coordinated.  In the first, an explosive device detonated on a train traveling toward Quetta.  The bomb had been hidden in a toilet and killed one person and injured five others.  Authorities suspect the Baluchistan Liberation Army of carrying out both these attacks, as they have claimed responsibility for similar attacks earlier in the month.
Two defense volunteers were attacked by motorcycle gunmen as they drove to work in Pattani province.  Manu Arbu of Sai Buri district was the brother of a well-known village head and was killed instantly.  Arbubah Dama was injured.
Four Iraqi police officers were killed and seven wounded when a roadside bomb exploded near the funeral procession being held for an officer killed earlier that day.
A suicide bomber drove his vehicle packed with explosives into a theater in Doha that is popular with Westerners. The theater, the Doha Players Theater, is also near a British school. One Briton, identified as Jonathan Adams, the theater director, was injured in the attack and at least sixteen people, including six Qataris, an Eritrean and Somali, and a Briton, were wounded in the attack. Buildings and cars in the vicinity were also damaged in the explosion. The attack occurred during a showing of Twelfth Night.  The bombing comes only days after a man claiming to be al-Qaeadas leader in Saudi Arabia issued a statement calling for militants throughout the Gulf to attack western targets. The attack also occurs on the second anniversary of the US invasion of Iraq, but it was not clear if these two events were linked.  On March 21, a group calling itself the Army of the Levant claimed responsibility for the attack.  On March 22, a different group, calling itself the Military Wing of the Greater Syrian Army claimed responsibility for the attack and promised a 'great surpise' for the US, Britain, and Italy and all those who have defiled the lands of Islam.  The bomber was identified as an Egyptian man, Omar Ahmad Abdullah Ali, who worked as a computer programmer for the state-owned Qatar Petroleum Co. and had worked at this firm for five years.
An explosive device detonated near an irrigation department office in Turbat, injuring four people.  The Baluchistan Liberation Army claimed responsibility for this and two other bomb blasts that occurred in the region (information on those explosions is not available).
A petrol bomb was thrown into a home in the Whitehorn area of Newtownsard, in County Down, but didn't cause any damage or injuries.  The attack comes at the end of a weekend of sectarian disturbances in the area.  The troubles may have been caused by the arrest and alleged assault of a 14-year-old from a loyalist area.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol exploded in Basra. One civilian was killed in the attack and one police officer wounded.
Gunmen attacked a police station in Baqubah. Four police officers were killed and two wounded in the attack.
A Qassam rocket was fired at the Gaza Strip. Officials believe that the rocket landed near Sapir College near Sederot. No damage or injuries were reported.
Members of the police department's bomb disposal unit recovered an improvised bomb buried next to a chapel in Lagao Village, General Santos City.  Authorities have been commanded to tighten security at churches in the region in the lead up to Holy Week.  Both Jemaah Islamiyah (JI) and the Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG) have threatened to strike christian churches as terrorist targets.
Unknown gunmen fired several shells at the Australian Embassy in Baghdad. The shells missed their target and fell on a nearby house. The house was damaged, but no casualties were caused.
Unknown persons detonated an explosive charge under an oil pipeline near Kirkuk. The explosion damaged the pipeline and caused a large oil leak and fire.  Oil pipelines in Iraq are a frequent target of insurgent attacks.
A bomb exploded near Makhachkala's district prosecutor's office in Makhachkala's Leninsky district.  Officials report that the device was placed in the basement of a building near the prosecutor's office.  No one was reported injured but damage was caused to the building and to cars parked nearby.  Authorities believe the device was remote-controlled and was packed with screws and bolts.
The railroad which connects Baluchistan to the rest of Pakistan was bombed.  The damage was repaired.  No casualties were reported and the perpetrator remains unknown.
A bomb exploded in a shopping mall in Kaslik, north of Beirut, an area made up mostly of anti-Syrian Christians.  The blast at the Alta Vista Center was caused by a 45-pound bomb left at the back entrance to the mall and destroyed most of the building. The attack killed three people, all workers, including a Sri Lankan and two Indians. Five other people were wounded in the attack, including a police officer wounded while inspecting the building.  This is the second bombing of Christian-inhabited areas in the past five days and comes amid instability in the country following the assassination of former Prime Minister Hariri and the partial withdrawal of Syrian troops.
The group, Global Intifada, claimed responsibility for setting a car, which belongs to the Russian Embassy, on fire, in Stockholm.  The car was set alight when a fire bomb, which was placed under it, detonated.  The vehicle was completely burned out but there were no reported injuries.  According to their statement of claim, the Global Intifada carried out the action as an indictment against the Russian state for their imperialistic war against Chechnya.
An explosive device, made of a paper bomb, detonated at a Blockbuster video store in Milan.  This was one of three explosive attacks in Milan on this evening and authorities believe all three were perpetrated by anarchists.  The blast caused a 10-cm hole in the window at the video store.
Vichien Kittikhun, abbot of Vachiraprakarn temple in Yala province's Raman district, was injured by a bomb hidden in a traffic island. Four soldiers, who were providing security for the monk, were also hit by shrapnel. The injured are hospitalized with non life-threatening injuries.
An explosive device, containing chemical explosives, was found in a glass jar outside of the Adana Chamber of Trade.  Bomb experts were able to safely defuse the device with no incident.
A group of unknown attackers ambushed a highway police patrol in Surobi, in Kabul Province.  The attackers targeted Col. Masum Jan, the deputy head of the highway police and his patrol on the Kabul-Jalalabad highway.  The officers returned fire and a clash ensued for about an hour.  The police suffered no casualties, though there was no information on whether the insurgents suffered any losses.
Qazi Abdul Aziz, an Afghan judge, was killed by Taliban members.  The spokesman for the Taliban, Mullah Lateefullah Hakimi, claimed responsibility for the slaying on behalf of his group.  The attack took place in Tarinkot, in Uruzgan.  The weapon used in the attack is unknown.
Three pilgrims in Hillah suffered from food poisoning, while on their way to celebrate the al-Arbaeen holiday in Karbala. The pilgrims were given poisoned food items by members of a terrorist group driving in a car in the city. This is one of several attacks on Shiite pilgrims in recent days.
Suspected Muslim insurgents shot dead two railway workers, Khunthong Tasue and Choo Khamlue.  The two were attacked by motorcycle gunmen as they sat outside a home for state railway workers in Than Yong Mat tambon, Rangae district, Narathiwat.
Police stopped a Syrian man who was driving a car loaded with explosives. The bomb was safely defused and the man arrested. The prevented attack occurred in al-Musayyib and was one of three such incidents in the city on this day.
An explosive charge was detonated near the vehicle of the head of the Kurdistan Democratic Party Branch 3 in Kifri, Najat Hasan, as he traveled back from Kifri. One member of the security force traveling with him was wounded in the attack, but Hasan was not injured.
A barber, Iyad Jalal was kidnapped and killed by unknown extremists. He was found wrapped in a grain sack outside his home four days after he disappeared. Officials say he was killed for his 'hair cutting style.' Many barbers in Iraq are targeted by gunmen and extremists who feel that certain types of hair and beard trimmings violate Muslim teachings.
A suicide bomber detonated a motorcycle bomb near a checkpoint near Musayyab. The checkpoint was set up to protect pilgrims walking from Baghdad to Najf to celebrate a Shiite religious holiday. Three police officers were killed, at least ten wounded, and two civilians were also killed in the attack.
Two mortar rounds were fired on the Green Zone, which houses many government buildings, by unknown insurgents. No damage was caused.
An incendiary device was found and made safe at a Belfast shopping complex.  The device caused a major traffic back-up and the shopping center had to be evacuated for hours.  Authorities are blaming this attempted attack and two others in the area on dissident republicans.
A remote-controlled car bomb exploded near the convoy of the Kirkuk city water services director, Abdul Qadir Zangana. One civilian was killed and at least seventeen others wounded in the attack.
Petr Korotchenko, first deputy mayor of Cherkessk in Russia's North Caucasus, survived an assassination attempt when attackers threw a grenade through his window.  The grenade did not explode.  The perpetrators are unknown.
Two men were attempting to place a bomb at the water pumping station in Khalis. The bomb exploded prematurely, killing both attackers.
There was an attack targeting the provincial governor's office.  A parked taxi near the office exploded with the driver inside.  The driver was killed.  The police are still investigating whether the attack was a suicide bombing. Taliban claimed the attack.  They also claimed that eight troops were killed and the attack was by remote-controlled device. However, no other independent source is able to confirm that.
A car filled with men burst through a checkpoint armed by Palestinian security forces. The police chased the men as they fled on foot, wounding three of them. Seven other militants entered the checkpoint area at the same time and burned down the tents used as offices by the Palestinian police at this checkpoint.
Unknown perpetrators blew up the natural gas line in Dhadar, but did not succeed in interrupting service to Quetta.  No casualties were reported.
The police chief of Balad Ruz, Col. Hatem Rashid Mohammed, was killed when gunmen opened fire on him as he was getting into his car in Balad Ruz. The attack also killed one of Col. Mohammed's aides and his driver.
Two Pakistanis and one Afghan truck driver, transporting oil to US forces were shot and killed.  Their vehicles were destroyed as well.  The area is considered a stronghold of the Taliban.  However, the perpetrator is still unknown.
An explosive device was planted along the Turkish Petroleum Corporation (TPAO) oil pipeline in Besiri District.  The device did not cause any damage to the pipeline.  No further information is provided.
The United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) attacked the Hotel Ambarish, injuring five people, including four hotel employees.  The attack was carried out with a grenade.
Two traffic policemen were gunned down by gunmen in Mosul.  No further information is available.
Two near-simultaneous bombs exploded in Songkhla province in southern Thailand.  The second bomb detonated in front of the Carrefour department store in Hat Yai.  Three people were killed and about seventeen injured by the blast.  The targets may signal a shift in strategy for the insurgency.  Insurgencts have tended to target civil servants, Buddhists, and security forces. However, the list of targets may have expanded to also include foreigners.
Two coordinated attacks against a police station and a government office were carried out by suspected insurgents in Narathiwat's Joh I Rong district.  In both attacks, groups of approximately ten men used grenade launchers to bombard the buildings, then fled into the forest on a nearby mountain. No one was injured in the attacks.
A member of the Babil Provincial Council, Salim Hilal, was assassinated when gunmen opened fire on his convoy as he was on his way to work in Hillah. Three of Hilal's guards were also wounded in the attack.  Police reported that they had arrested two people in this incident.
Gunmen attacked the home of a translator who works for the Iraqi government and police, wounding her and killing her father. The attack occurred in Baqubah.
Ma Sama-ae and his cousin Mareeki Samae, two village security guards, were ambushed while patrolling at night in Hutaemajae village, tambon Ka-yukhla, Waeng district, Narathiwat province.  One man died at the scene, while the other died later at the hospital.
Three Iraqi policemen were wounded when their patrol was attacked in Kirkuk by unkown gunmen.
Two gunmen shot and killed village headman Hami Kaloyee near his home in tambon Mohmavi, Yaring District.
A Molotov cocktail and stones were thrown by Palestinians at an Israeli vehicle near the village of Huwwarah, south of Nabulus. No casualties or damage was reported.
A bomb was defused outside Makhachkala's Emergencies Ministry at about 10:15 local time.  About 1.5 kg of explosive was contained in the package, planted at the gates of the ministry.  No one was injured; the perpetrators are unknown.
A suicide bomber killed himself, an American, and two French nationals in an attack on Cairo's main bazaar. The attacker detonated a bag filled with seven pounds of TNT and nails. The blast also injured at least eighteen others, of which, three are Americans.  Initially, Egyptian government spokesmen advanced the theory that the bomber may have detonated prematurely. However, both the targeting of the attack and subsequent government statements would seem to indicate that the attack was orchestrated according to plan.  In the days following the bombing, the Islamic Glory Brigades in the Land of the Nile, a previously unknown group, claimed the attack in an Internet posting.   The bomber has also been identified as Hassan Rafaat Ahmed Bashandi, an engineering student at Egypt's Zagazig University.
The police commander in the town of Hadithah was assassinated by unknown gunmen.  No further information is available.
A bomb intended for a police patrol in Basra exploded just after the patrol passed, injuring two civilians.
The chairman of the Birendranagar municipality committee of Surkhet was shot and killed in an armed attack by unknown perpetrators.
Brigadier General Basim al-Jaza'iri, chief of Najaf Police department, was kidnapped in Baghdad. The group affiliated with Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, Tanzim Qa'idat Al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn, claimed responsibility for the kidnapping and later executed the police chief. The statement was posted on the internet, along with pictures of Jaza'iri's ID cards.
The imam and preacher of the Al-Taysir mosque in Al-Mahmudiyah City, Shaykh Mujahid Muhammad Taha al-Samarrai, was assassinated by unknown gunmen was he was leaving his home in al-Mahmudiyah.
Two Nasir rockets and five mortars were fired at the Gush Qatif settlement. No damage or injuries were reported. The attack comes as retaliation for the shooting of three Palestinian youths by Israel Defense Forces (IDF) troops and is one of many attacks perpetrated in recent days. The attack was claimed by the military wing of the Popular Resistance Committees.
At least twenty mortar shells were fired at Qatif bloc area by Palestinian militants. No damage was reported. The attacks come as retaliation for the killing of three Palestinian youths by Israel Defense Forces (IDF) troops and break the recent cease-fire.
Sammuel Sammy Dote was shot dead in Catbalogan town, Samar province.  Dote was a former New People's Army (NPA) rebel commander who turned himself in to officials. It is unclear who killed Dote or for what reason. His killing, however, occurred just six days after the murder of another former NPA rebel commander, Rodrigo Sugalan, in the same province.
The convoy of deputy interior minister, Gen. Tariq al-Baldawi, was attacked by gunmen who opened fire on his convoy in Baghdad. Al-Baldawi was not injured in the attack, but the deputy's son and two other people were wounded in the attack and one guard was killed.
Twelve Iraqi police officers who worked as security guards for the Northern Oil Company were killed when a bomb planted on a roadside in Kirkuk exploded as they tried to defuse it. Three officers were also wounded in the attack.
A police vehicle was blown up near Makhachkala at about midnight local time.  One police officer was killed and two others wounded.  The bomb had about 10 kg of TNT equivalent.  The perpetrators are unknown.
Militants placed explosives inside a local Shiite mosque in Madain and detonated the explosives, severely damaging the mosque, but not causing any injuries.
Authorities are blaming dissident republicans for leaving a crude by viable explosive device outside of a civil center in Lisburn, in Antrim County.  The explosive was discovered and made safe by bomb experts.  Over 300 people at the civic center, who had gathered to watch a theater production, were evacuated from the premises during the operation.  An anonymous caller warned of the device, warning it would detonate twenty-five minutes after the warning.  There were no reported injuries.
A suicide bomber detonated a bomb he was carrying in a briefcase in a market in Mahawil, north of Hillah. The explosion killed four policemen and wounded six civilians.
The imam of the Al-Rawiyin Mosque in al-Qaim was assassinated by gunmen.
A group of armed Sunni men entered the town of Madaen and took about 50-70 Shiite men hostage. They ordered all Shiites to leave the town and threatened to kill the hostages and anyone who remained in Madaen. Some sources indicated that there were up to 150 hostages, including women and children.When US and Iraqi forces entered the town three days later, however, they found no sign of gunmen or hostages. They did find a car bomb making factory along with other weapons, including detonators and mortars. Several suspected insurgents were arrested.  Several days later, at least fifty bodies were found in the Tigris River near Madaen, believed to be the bodies of the hostages.
A member of an oil protection force in Baiji was killed when he was attacked by gunmen.  No further information is provided.
The police official in charge of the special forces of the security adviser at the Interior Ministry, Major General Muntazar Jasim al-Samarrai, survived an assassination attempt when gunmen opened fire on his car as he was on his way to the interior ministry. The attackers conducted their attack both from a car and a nearby house. Al-Samarrai's driver was injured in the attack as was one of his escorts. One attacker was wounded and arrested.
A policeman was killed in Kirkuk when gunmen attacked him as he was walking home.
An explosive device detonated at an office of the Nationalist Action Party (MHP) in the Kadikoy district of Istanbul Province.  One person was wounded when the device detonated at the door of the office and shattered the glass in the building.  Authorities believe the explosive was left in a parcel outside of the MHP office door.
A large mob, led by the International Khatme Nabuwat Movement Bangladesh (IKNMB), staged an attack against the Ahmadiyya community (Muslim sect).  More than fifty people were injured.  The attackers entered the community with hot pokers, machetes, rocks, and darts.  The objective was to hang a sign that stated A place of worship for the Ahmaddiyya Community, Sundarban Bazaar, letting Muslims know that the house of worship is not a mosque.  Local reports claimed that police helped the attackers to hang the sign and made no attempts to stop the attacks.  It was also claimed that the injured were not attended to in a timely manner in the hospital.   IKNMB has been campaigning for the government to officially recognize that the sect is not Muslim.
An explosive device, which had been left in a package, detonated in front of the Trade and Consumers Courts in Besiktas, in Istanbul.  The blast caused some material damage but there were no reported injuries.  Authorities believe the blast was caused by a sound bomb.
A senior defense ministry adviser, Maj. Gen. Adnan al-Qaraghulli, was assassinated when gunmen broke into his home in Baghdad and shot him. al-Qaraghullis son was also killed in the attack.
Assistant village headman Abdulloh Mahama was shot by a motorcycle gunman at a Rueso district teashop. He later died at the Rueso hospital. Police believe the gunman was a Muslim militant who had tried to kill Abdulloh last month.
Palestinians opened fire on Israeli laborers at the Tuffah Crossing, near Never Deqalim. No injuries were reported in the attack.
An explosive device detonated outside the home of a journalist in the city of Quetta.  There were no reported casualties caused by the blast.  This was one of five explosive attacks that took place in Kalat and Quetta on this day.
Two police officers were injured when unidentified gunmen fired at their car in the Oktyabrsky district of Grozny.
Gunmen opened fire on a policeman in Baghdad, Ali Talib, as he was walking towards his car. Talib was killed in the attack.
Insurgents abducted twenty fishermen as they were traveling between Najaf and Diwaniya provinces and Tharthar Lake. The fishermen were shot, execution style, in a soccer stadium in Haditha.
An aide to Shiite cleric Al-Sistani, Iyad Shubbar, was assassinated by gunmen in Baghdad.  No further information was reported.
A dynamite stick was thrown into a gas station in southern Beirut, only hours after a grenade exploded in a cafeteria in Beirut. The dynamite stick did not cause any casualties. The blasts come amid political turmoil in Lebanon between pro-Syrian leadership and anti-Syrian opposition.
There was a bomb attack by the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) on the Land Revenue office and the Internal Revenue office.  No casualties or injuries were reported.
A roadside bomb exploded near a convoy carrying foreign security contractors on the road to Baghdad's airport outside the Green Zone. Three vehicles were damaged in the attack. The attack killed two foreigners and wounded three others. Nationalities of those killed were not reported.  This is the second attack on foreign contractors on this stretch of road in the past week.  The attack was claimed by Tanzim Qa'idat Al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn.
Two groups of heavily-armed assailants attacked security forces in Narathiwat's Bacho district in coordinated attacks. The first group attacked a marine operations base at Ban Lolohsawor health station.  This attack, the second attack took place about 2 km away when the second group of attackers ambushed police.  No casualties were reported.
Seven police officers were wounded in Basra when a roadside bomb detonated near their patrol. Their vehicle was also destroyed in the explosion.
Insurgents attacked a power network in Al-Musayyab, causing damage to the network and wounding four security guards charged with protecting the power center.
An Iraqi contractor who worked for the US military was shot to death when gunmen attacked him as he drove through western Baghdad.
Two explosive charges were detonated in front of the home of Nawfal Abd-al-Husayn, head of Diyala Governorate Council, in Baqubah.  The first killed a 10-year old child bystander.
The State Peace and Development Council claimed that Karenni National Progressive Party (KNPP) insurgents had planted mines around an electricity supply pylon, whose grid links Lawpita Hydropower Station and Toungoo. KNPP confirmed that they were responsible for the attack and said their motive was to undermine the SPDC's hold on power.
Two suicide car bombs exploded at the checkpoint entrance to the Iraqi Police Academy in Tikrit. Seven people were killed and twenty-seven wounded in total in the double bombings, including many police recruits.  The first bomb exploded among a crowd of recruits outside the Academy, where they were gathering before a trip to Jordan for training.  The group led by Jordanian rebel Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, Tanzim Qa'idat Al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn, claimed responsibility for the double bombing.
Two border patrol officers were killed and two officers and a villager were wounded when a bomb exploded at the Muno Border Police booth at a flea market in Narathiwat's Sungai Kolok district, near the Thailand-Malaysia border. The dead were listed as Police Senior Sergeant Major Sutthawat Chankhao and Police Lt Corporal Patiwat Harnpala.  The injured were Police Lt Corporal Sorasit Udomsak, Police Lt Corporal Chalermpol Chanthasri, and villager Chueta Uma.
A roadside bomb targeting a convoy of civilian vehicles near Al-Rashid Camp in southeastern Baghdad exploded, wounding several foreigners. No information on the precise number wounded or their nationalities was provided.
A group of about sixty Taliban members attacked the mayor's office in the southern province of Kandahar.  Government troops returned fire and killed four attackers.  Two soldier were also killed in the clash.  The attack leads local authorities to believe that rebels are stepping up their campaign of violence in the area.
The Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) set fire to the Nepal Television tower (state-owned).  There were no injuries or casualties reported.
An interior ministry inspector general, Brigadier General Jihad al-Luaybi, was seriously wounded in an assassination attempt against him. Gunmen attacked his convoy as his was leaving his home in Baghdad. The attack also killed two of al-Luaybis guards and wounded one other. The attack was claimed by Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn, led by al-Zarqawi.
A mortar shell landed in the center of the Neve Deqalim settlement. The attack comes on the day of a massive anti-pullout rally launched by Israeli settlers in Gaza. No one was injured in the attack.
A bomb, made of a fire extinguisher and detonated by cell phone, detonated outside a mosque in Joh I Rong, in Narathiwat Province.  Authorities believe this bombing was carried out by the same people as the 16 April bombs in the same city, as many of the components of the devices were similar.  The assailants are believed to be locals.  No information on casualties was available.
Lt. Col. Alaa Khalil Ibrahim, who worked in the visa section of the Interior Ministry, was shot dead on his way to work in Baghdad.
Mahamarohaya Yusoh, a villager accused of being a military informant, was shot dead outside of his home in Sungai Padi.  Yusoh was shot six times by militants as he was arriving home after a late dinner.
A bike bomb exploded injuring six civilians and four police officers and damaging three public buses in the Aguablanca neighborhood.  The bike was chained to a post located near a bus stop and a temporary police barricade.   The explosion took place as three busses passed by but it is not known if the intended target was the police post or the buses.   Police responding to the incident quickly apprehended the man who left the bomb.
A suicide car bomber detonated his explosives outside a barricade near the headquarters of the Interior Ministry Special Forces Unit. The attack was one of four suicide bombings that occurred in Baghdad around the same time, targeting primarily Iraqi army and police forces. At least twenty people were killed total in these four bombings and over fifty wounded. The dead included at least five civilians, seven Iraqi military personnel, and two policemen. The wounded were mostly civilians, but included at least two policemen and thirteen National Guard. Casualty numbers for specific attacks was not provided.  This and many of the other bombings on this day were claimed by the group led by Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, Tanzim Qa'idat Al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn.NOTE: Casualty numbers include all four attacks launched at the same time in Baghdad on this day.
Gunmen opened fire on a police patrol in Baghdad. One policeman was wounded in the attack.
Two members of the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade, affiliated with Fatah, fired several Qassam rockets at the Gaza Strip. They were arrested by IDF troops. No injuries were reported in their attacks.
Mastat Sulong, a Muslim cleric, was shot at by unknown gunmen, as he drove to deliver a morning sermon at a mosque in tambon Toh Deng.  Eight bullets were fired at Sulong's vehicle, but none caused any damage.  The gunmen fired at him from a motorcycle.  Authorities believe that Sulong was targeted because of his cooperation with anti-terrorism officials in the area.
A teacher was kidnapped, shot, and killed by unknown perpetrators.  The attack took place in the Pahalgam area of Anantnag.  No further information is available.
A policeman was shot in Baghdad by unknown gunmen.  No further information is available.
Gunmen opened fire on a police patrol in Mosul, wounding two police officers.  No further information is available.
An explosive charge detonated at the Regional Directorate for Agriculture and Forestry (DRAF) office in Lucciana, on the island of Corsica.  The explosion started a fire, which caused severe damage to the building.  Authorities found the initials FLNC (Corsican National Liberation Front) scrawled at the scene of the attack, along with the line, Danger: mine.  Agricultura campera (agriculture will survive)
A Palestinian boy was found throwing Molotov cocktails on the Highway 60 near Bethlehem. He was shot and killed after trying to escape from custody. His attack did not cause any damage.
An Australian citizen who has lived in California since 1992 and is married to an American, Douglas Wood, was kidnapped and held hostage in Iraq. A video released by the group holding him, which identified itself as the Shura Council of the Mujahideen of Iraq, shows Wood pleading for his life and calling on US, British, and Australian forces to withdraw from Iraq. Two militants in bullet proof vests stood on either side of Wood. Wood had been working in Iraq for about one year as a engineering contractor.  The release of the video was apparently timed to coincide with a visit to Iraq by Australian Defense Minister Robert Hill.  On Friday, May 6, Wood's captors released a video showing Wood, with his head shaved, and two militants with guns pointing at Wood's head. The captors set a 72-hour deadline for Australians to pull their troops out of Iraq.  On May 12, Australian Mufti Shaykh Taj-al-Din al-Hilali, who went to Iraq to negotiate with Wood's captors, announced that Wood was still alive and the deadline had been extended to May 12 at midnight.  On May 15, al-Hilali announced the captors had lifted the deadline indefinitely in order to continue negotiations.  On May 19, al-Hilali claimed to have had a phone conversation with a man he believed was Douglas Wood. The cleric claimed that negotiations were on-going and that Wood would be released soon as a favor to the Australian Muslim community.  On May 25, sources reported that al-Hilali had offered to replace Douglas Wood as a hostage. Although Australian officials appreciated al-Hilali's offer, they continued to say that they wanted the unconditional release of Wood. Al-Hilali released a video statement in which he states his willingness to replace Wood as a hostage to Al-Jazeera and was working through negotiation to convince captors to take his offer.  On June 15, Wood was freed during an operation led by Iraqi military forces who were acting on several intelligence tips received earlier. Another Iraqi contractor was also freed in the operation and two militants were arrested. Some sources reported that negotiations had secured Wood's release already and that he had been transferred to Baghdad for release when communication broke down, leading to the military operation. It was unclear if this was the case.
Unknown perpetrators bombed railroad tracks leading from Quetta to the country.  There was damage to the tracks, but no reported injuries or fatalities.
A car bomb targeting an Iraqi police patrol exploded in Baghdad. the explosion killed two Iraqi policemen and wounded eleven other people.
Three mortars were fired at a settlement in the Gaza Strip. No injuries were reported. One of the mortars hit hothouses in the settlement.
A bomb planted in a pickup truck, targeting an Iraqi police convoy, exploded as the convoy passed in Baghdad. Three people, two civilians and one police officer were wounded in the attack.
A police officer was shot dead by gunmen in Samarra. He was one of three police officers killed in Samarra on this day in separate incidents.
A business man working as a contractor with the US military in Iraq was killed by gunmen in Shurgat, near Mosul.
A suicide bomber carrying hidden explosives detonated them outside a police recruitment center (also a Kurdistan Democratic Party headquarters building) in Arbil, northern Iraq. The attack occurred as hundreds of people stood outside the center, waiting to apply for jobs. The attacker apparently posed as a job seeker before detonating his bomb. Several nearby buildings and cars parked in front of the building were also damaged in the attack.  At least sixty people were killed and over 150 injured in the attack.  The group known as Ansar al-Sunnah claimed responsibility for the attack and addressing leading Kurdish politician Massoud Barzani, the group promised more attacks on Kurds because they were cooperating with US forces.  On May 18, Iraqi security forces announced that they had arrested some of the ringleaders behind the bombing.
A police patrol in Mosul, which was protecting a group of personnel defusing an explosive device in the city, was attacked by gunmen. No police were injured, but one civilian was killed.
Unknown perpetrators shot and wounded Wali Mohammad Wani, a village headman, and Bashir Ahmed Dar, a civilian.
Gunmen ambushed a police patrol in the Al-Amil area of Baghdad, killing ten policemen and wounding two.
A Qassam rocket was fired at the Neve Deqalim settlement. It landed on the roof of a clinic, where it was discovered, and defused safely by Border Patrol bomb squad personnel.
The Lord's Resistance Army attacked a camp for Ugandans displaced by the conflict in the north, killing ten and injuring fourteen. The perpetrators were reported to have used guns and knives to attack people who had left the camp's compound to tend to their farming.
A suicide bomber blew up his car filled with explosives in a vegetable market in the Shiite town of Suwayra. The attack killed at least thirty-one people and wounded forty-five.  This attack is part of an increase in guerrilla violence that has put more pressure on the new Iraqi government, which was announced last week.
Palestinians fired an antitank rocket at a civilian car near Kfar Darom in Gaza Strip. No one was injured in the attack.
A Turkish truck driver transporting goods for US forces, Salih Gulbol, was killed when his truck was attacked by gunmen near Baghdad.
Three powerful explosive devices detonated in the city of Rangoon in a seemingly coordinated attack on private citizens.  The first device detonated at the Yangon Trade Center, where a Thailand Exhibition was being held.  The device, a time bomb, had been planted in a bag and left among the seats in the auditorium.  In the three blasts, eleven people died and over 162 were injured (no disaggregated data is available).  Authorities were blaming dissident terrorists groups such as the Karen National Union (KNU), the Shan State Army (SSN), the Karenni National Progressive Party (KNPP) or the National Coalition Government of Union of Burma (NCGUB) for perpetrating the attacks in order the undermine the stability of the State.
A senior official in the Transportation Ministry, Zawba' al-Ma'ini, was killed when gunmen attacked his car as he left his home in Baghdad. Al-Ma'ini's driver was also killed in the attack.
Four people were killed and nine wounded when a suicide bomber detonated his vehicle at a police checkpoint in Baghdad. Two of those killed and six of those wounded were police, the rest civilians.
In the Untsukulskiy District of Dagestan, Russa, the vehicle of a local police head was attacked on May 9, 2005. The officer was not hurt, but two colleagues in the vehicle were injured. Police believe the perpetrators belong to a terrorist group, focused on attacking police officers.
Suspected members of the New People's Army (NPA) shot and killed Leon Arcillas, the mayor of Santa Rosa.  The attackers also managed to kill one of his police guards and injure another.  The attack took place at a town hall where he was officiating a wedding ceremony.  The NPA had attempted to assassinate Arcillas in July 2003 and has issued death threats to him ever since.  Authorities believe that there were more than one gunmen at the scene of the attack.  Arcillas was a strong ally of President Gloria Arroyo.
An oil pipeline that carries crude oil from Kirkuk to Bayji refineries was attacked by insurgents who placed an explosive charge under the pipeline. The explosion caused a large fire and damaged the pipeline. The oil industry is the target of frequent attacks in Iraq.
A suicide bomber detonated his vehicle outside a police station in Baghdad. The attacker was trying to reach the police station, but blew up his car before he reached it. The attack killed three civilians and wounded nine others, including some police officers.
Unidentified Muslim militants shot and killed Police Sergeant-Major Hasem Banyaem, as he was on his way to work in Yarang district of Pattani Province.  The attack took place in a market in the tambon of Pitumudee.  The shots were fired from gunmen riding on a motorcycle.
Three separate bomb blasts occurred in Yala Province within hours of each other.  The first blast took place at a fried chicken shop near the Thempa train station in Songkhla Province.  Three police officers, who were in the shop at the time, were injured by the blast.  The device was hidden in a plastic bag and authorities believe was detonated by cell phone.
A senior police official who led the police control room at the Interior Ministry, Col. Fadhil Mohammed Mobarak was shot and killed by gunmen as he drove to work in Baghdad.
A car bomb was remotely detonated near a police patrol on a road in northern Iraq, Kurdistan region. The attack wounded one police officer.
Two police officers and five village defense volunteers were injured when an explosive device, which was planted in a fire extinguisher, detonated in a tea shop where they had stopped to take a break.  The explosive device had been left outside the shop and experts were about to examine it when it detonated.  The attack took place in Saba Yoi, in Songkhla Province.
The Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam bombed a police convoy that was protecting a group of Eelam Peoples Democratic Party members.  It is assumed that the party members were the target.  Four police officers were injured.
A group of unknown assailants set fire to the home of a teacher in Narathiwat Province.  The perpetrators used gasoline to start the fire at the home, which is three kilometers from the Baan Bangopulo School, which was also set ablaze on this evening.  No one was home at the time of the attack.
Three police officers were slightly injured when a group of unidentified assailants attacked the Uluyol Police Center in Dogubeyazit, in Agri Province.  The attackers used both automatic weapons and hand grenades to attack the officers.  The three injured were wounded when a hand grenade detonated in front of the police building.
A suicide bomber detonated his bomb next to an Iraqi police patrol in Baghdad. Four policemen were killed in the attack. At least eight other people were injured.
A car bomb exploded near a mosque in Baqubah where a group of policemen were standing. Four policemen were wounded in the attack.
One police officer was killed and three others wounded when an explosive device detonated in Su-ngai Padi.  The device detonated as the officers were patrolling an area near the railway line.  Authorities believe that militants have increased their attacks in recent weeks in the lead-up to a planned visit of representatives from the Organization of Islamic Conference at the end of May.
A telephone booth in Pattani Province was set on fire by unknown arsonists.  This was one of five arson attacks to take place in the province on this day, only two days before students are set to return to school for a new semester.
A suicide car bomber detonated his vehicle near the convoy of Diyala province's governor, Governor Raed Rashid Hamid al-Mullah Jawad. Jawad was not injured in the attack, but three of his guards were hurt.  This was one of two suicide bombings in Baqubah within minutes of each other on this day. Both attacks were claimed by the group loyal to Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, Tanzim Qa'idat Al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn.
Two mortars were fired on the Gush Katif settlement in Gaza strip. No injuries were reported.
Sheikh Hassan Naimi, a member of the Sunni Muslim Clerics Association, was kidnapped from a mosque in Baghdad and found dead two days later. The kidnapping occurred the day after the Sunni group criticized the Shiite dominated government of state terrorism and ignoring the killing of Sunnis. Naimi was one of two Sunni clerics kidnapped and found dead on the same days.  Authorities believe this attack and two others on clerics was aimed at creating sectarian tensions in the area.
The Ban Luemu School in Krong Pinang district of Yala Province, was set fire by arsonists at about 1:00 am.  The building, including the library and teacher's room was destroyed.  The perpetrators apparently set fire to the school from the rear of the building.
Two officers were injured when a group of unknown gunmen ambushed a patrol of police and defense volunteers in Thung Yang Daeng district.  No further information is provided.
A homemade explosive device, made in a fire extinguisher, detonated in Pulajaemudo, in Narathiwat Province, as two police officers were patrolling the area.  The blast damaged the engine compartment of the car, but didn't cause any injuries.  Authorities believe that the fire extinguisher used in the attack may have been one of the forty-eight stolen earlier in the month from local offices.
An Iraqi Defnese Ministry official, Sgt. Alwan Jabir Risan, was killed in a drive-by shooting in Baghdad.  No further information is available.
Gunmen opened fire on a police checkpoint in Kirkuk, killing one policemen and wounding two others. A police vehicle was also damaged in the attack.
Eight Iraqi Turkmen who worked for a security firm in Kirkuk were kidnapped and killed after their convoy was attacked by rocket-propelled grenades near Fallujah. Several of the vehicles in the convoy were set on fire during the attack. The bodies of the eight men were found the day after the ambush and their kidnapping.
A car bomb was detonated near a police convoy in Baqubah. The explosion injured fourteen people, including two police officers and damaged all three vehicles in the convoy.
As Palestinian gunmen, members of Hamas, were preparing to fire mortars at an Israeli settlement, an Israeli aircraft fired at the militants, killing one and stopping the attack. Hamas said that the mortar attack (their second in matter of minutes, the first was successful) was intended as retaliation for an earlier killing of a Hamas militant near Rafah.
A US-Iraqi businessman and pilot was kidnapped and killed by the group loyal to Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, Tanzim Qa'idat Al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn. In a statement released on the internet, the group showed an Illinois driver's license identifying the man as Neenus Khoshaba, a US national. According to officials, Khoshaba was from an Asyrian family and was in Iraq on business. He disappeared four days before the release of the statement, following a meeting with oil executives, which may have been a trap used by insurgents to kidnap him. Khoshaba was not affiliated with the US military.
A memorial function being held at the house of Abdul Gani Bhat (who had been shot by militants the previous week) was attacked by unknown perpetrators.  A grenade was thrown outside of the tent, injuring twenty-two people.  Two people, Mirza Mohammad Aslam and Imtiaz Ahmed Dar died in the hospital.  The police have reported that Bhat was on the militant's hit list.
Insurgents attacked the home of a Sunni politician, Fawwaz al-Jarba, in Mosul.  Al-Jarba's guards tried to repel the attackers and requested help from US troops. Seven people were killed in the attack, including al-Jarba, his driver, and three of his bodyguards.
Two Nasir rockets were fired at the Dugit settlement. The attack did not cause any injuries or damages. The attack was claimed by the military wing of the Popular Resistance Committees. The attack was in retaliation for an Israel Defense Force (IDF) air strike on Hamas militants. The attack was one of several by Palestinian groups on this and the previous day in response to this air strike.
A car bomb exploded outside a Shiite mosque, the Imam al-Mahdi mosque, in Baghdad, killing two children and wounding five other people. The blast also caused damage to nearby houses.
Palestinian militants fired six mortar shells at the Morag settlement. No damage or injuries were caused. The attack was claimed by the military wing of Hamas and is one of several in recent days. Recent attacks were sparked by the Israeli killing of several Hamas militants.
Ali Musluoglu, a Turkish businessman and head of a transport and construction firm operating in Baghdad, Mubluoollary Ynbaat and Nakliyat (Musluoglu Transportation Company, Inc.), was kidnapped in Baghdad. Musluoglu had just arrived in Baghdad to oversee the operations of his company which was operating as a subcontractor carrying building supplies and was investigating the whereabouts of five haulage trucks from his firm that were missing.  The group holding him was later identified itself as the Ali Bin Abu Talib Jihad Organization. The group said they would kill the man if his firm did not leave Iraq.  The company issued a plea for his release on June 4, 2005 and stated that the family-owned company did not have any contract or connection with US forces. The statement also said that the company was willing to leave Iraq and would not do any more business in the country.  On June 7, the kidnappers called the family of Musluoglu and demanded a one-million dollar ransom within four days. On June 7, the group also released a video showing Musluoglu and stating that they would kill the business man and two of his companions unless Turkey stopped all support of US forces in Iraq and cooperation with US firms doing business in Iraq. Nothing was heard from the captors after the deadline elapsed.On September 20, 2005, Musluoglu was freed after paying a ransom of $250,000, accepted by the kidnappers after they reduces their original demand. He reported that during his captivity he was twice sold to other groups.
Palestinian militants fired three mortars at the Netzarim settlement. No injuries were caused. The attack is one of several attacks on Israeli settlements  in recent days. Recent attacks were sparked by the Israeli killing of several Hamas militants.
The muezzin of the Al-Hamzah Mosque in Baghdad, Shaykh Iyad Khalid Muhammad al-Samarrai, was kidnapped in Baghdad. His body was found several days later, shot in the head and with marks of torture on his body.
Ten Shiite men were abducted in western Iraq as they returned from visiting a Muslim shrine in Syria. Relatives report that the men were kidnapped when militants stopped them and accused them of supplying the US military with information. The bodies of the men were found in Nikheb, near the Syrian border one week later.
Gunmen shot and killed Ali Mousa Salman, a director general in the trade ministry, as he was driving to work in Baghdad. The gunmen opened fire on Salman's vehicle, killing Salman and his driver and wounding three other people.
A kindergarten classroom in Ban Kamiyo School, in Muang district, was burned by unknown arsonists.  The classroom was destroyed by the fire.  Authorities believe this attack, and another which killed two municipal workers, were in retaliation for the raid of an Islamic school in Yaring district only a week prior.
A car bomb exploded outside the Habayibna restaurant, which is a popular spot for police to gather for lunch, in Baghdad during lunch time. At least eleven people were killed and 110 injured.
One police officer was injured when an explosive device, which was attached to a motorcycle and detonated by mobile phone, exploded in Pattani province.  The device was left in a park where about fifteen police officers were playing football.  The officer injured, Police Sergeant Wittaya Saroj, suffered injuries to his leg as a result of the blast.
A car bomb exploded near a police patrol and the Dijlah Junior High School for Girls in Baghdad, near Withaq Square, a Christian neighborhood. Police had been called to the scene by residents who noticed a suspicious vehicle parked near the school. When police approached the car, it was detonated remotely. Six bystanders were killed and three civilians and one police officer were wounded in the attack.
The body of a woman who was kidnapped, was found strangled in Aceh, on Sumatra island.  The woman had been accused by her attackers of association with government security personnel.  Authorities are blaming separatist guerrillas of perpetrating this attack.  The incident comes as government and rebel representatives are about to begin their fourth set of peace talks in Helsinki.
The Ban Paiman School in Bo Thong, was set on fire, using petrol.  Local residents tried to extinguish the blaze before it caused major damage, but some walls were destroyed.  This was one of two schools set alight on this evening.
A parcel bomb, made up of a book packed with 50 grams of gunpowder, detonated at a temporary residence center in Modena, which is directed by the twin brother of the Minister for Relations with Parliament, Carlo Giovanardi.  The Informal Anarchists Federation claimed responsibility for this attack and another parcel bomb, which was sent in Turin.Note:  Incident date is approximate.
A car bomb, which was packed with forty to forty-five pounds of explosives in backpacks, detonated on a busy street in the San Blas district of Madrid.  The Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) called a warning into the Gara newspaper about forty-five minutes before the device exploded.  Police managed to almost clear the area before the blast, but three people were injured and many others were treated for ear damage as a result of the detonation.  The vehicle, a small Renault Express truck, was parked on the corner of Rufino Gonzalez and Alcala streets, which runs into the city center and past the city's main buildings.  The truck used in the attack had been stolen from a small village outside the city on Tuesday.  This attack comes only a few days after the Spanish government had agreed to open up talks with ETA if they laid down their arms.
Gunmen opened fire on a group of people driving to work in Baghdad. Among those killed were a translator working for the US government and Baghdad University Professor Mussa Salum Abbas and three of his bodyguards. It is unclear which of the two were the intended target of the attack. Both contractors working with US forces and University professors are the frequent target of insurgent attacks. One civilian was also killed in the attack.
An explosive charge was detonated on a road in Arbil governorate. When police arrived to investigate the incident, three more explosive charges were detonated, wounding two police officers.
A restaurant owned by a Shiite in Baghdad was attacked by gunmen who opened fire on the restaurant. The owner was killed and five wounded, including the owner's son. Sectarian violence by Sunnis unhappy with Shiites increased power in the new regime in common in Baghdad.
Police units stopped two armed insurgents from the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) as they attempted to carry out an attack against Ramon Rodriguez Manjarrez, the Mayor of Ortega.  Police exchanged fire with the insurgents wounding and capturing one while the other escaped.  The captured assailant told authorities that the attack had been ordered by the FARC and accused Rodriguez of corruption.  This is the second attack on a local mayor in the last two weeks.
A car bomb exploded outside the telecommunications building in Tikrit. The blast was targeting a police convoy. Two civilians were killed and seven others wounded. The attack was part of a coordinated double suicide bombing that killed a total of nine people and wounded forty-four others.
Four persons armed with firebombs that they planned to use in terrorist attacks were arrested near Nablus before they could carry out their attack.
A small explosive device detonated in the middle of the night, on a wooden bridge in the gardens in the Valley of the Fallen mausoleum, in Madrid province.  The Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) called a warning into a newspaper prior to the blast, but the damage was not noticed until the next day.  The bridge was completely wrecked and debris was scattered all over the area.
Arsonists set fire to a building at the Ban Cho Bantang School in Bannang Sata, causing major damage.  The building, which housed a classroom, an Islamic study room and a prayer room, was almost destroyed.  This was one of a number of violent actions perpetrated on the region on this evening.
An explosive device detonated on a railway car which was traveling from Bitlis' Tatvan district to Elazig.  It is unclear if the device was a mine placed in the train, or if it was detonated by remote control.  About fifty meters of train tracks were damaged, along with two railway cars, by the explosion.  The People's Defense Forces (HPG) claimed responsibility for the attack and also claimed they killed five soldiers at the scene of the blast, but the later details have not been confirmed.
Gunmen shot and killed a senior Kurdish official, Maj. Gen,. Ahmed al-Barazanchi, director of internal affairs of the Kirkuk province and a former police chief. Al-Barazanchi was shot while he was walking, unprotected in Kirkuk. The Ansar al-Sunnah Army claimed responsibility for the attack.
A suicide bomber detonated his vehicle near the Oil Ministry in Baghdad. He tried to enter the gate of the Ministry, but was prevented from doing so. The attack killed two security guards and wounded a police officer and a passer-by.  The oil industry is a frequent target of insurgent attacks.
Gunmen attacked a Baghdad police station, headquarters of the Baghdad polices Major Crime Unit in Amariyah, using mortars, RPGs, and machine guns. The attack led to a gunbattle that lasted about 30 minutes.  The attack was claimed by the group loyal to Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, Tanzim Qa'idat Al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn.  No information on casualties was given.
Five bomb attacks took place on the island of Corsica, in one afternoon.  All five attacks were claimed by the Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC)-Union of Combatants.  The second bomb detonated at the former premises of the Regional Directorate for Industry, Research and the Environment in Lucciana.  Only slight damage was caused.
Five bomb attacks took place on the island of Corsica, in one afternoon.  All five attacks were claimed by the Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC)-Union of Combatants.  The fifth bomb detonated at an unoccupied holiday villa in Porto Vecchio.  Only slight damage was caused.
Somchai Chantasuwan, a Buddhist teacher, was shot and killed by unknown gunmen in Panare district of Pattani province.  The victim was a teacher at the Thanam School in the district and was shot in the head.  Authorities are saying that this attack is part of the unrest in three southern provinces.
Sheikh Safwan Ali Farhan, a Shiite cleric and senior member of the Shiite Badr Brigade militia, was the target of an assassination attempt in Baghdad when gunmen opened fire on Farhan and his wife. Both were injured in the attack. Sheikh Farhan later died of his injuries.
Gunmen opened fire on a police patrol in the Dora district of Baghdad, wounding four policemen.
On the evening of May 31, 2005, a remote-detonated bomb hit a police bus in Mackhachkala. A police officer and two passers-by were admitted to the hospital while six other police officers were treated for concussions. The force of the explosion was equivalent to 5 kg of TNT.
A remote-detonated explosive device, detonated by mobile phone, exploded at a Buddhist temple in Narathiwat province.  The blast injured Pra Thammajara, a monk and four of his security escort team members.  All five victims were reported in serious condition.  Buddhist monks have kept themselves confined to their temples in recent months since an increase in separatist violence erupted in the southern provinces.  Lately, however, the monks have resumed their alms rounds with military escorts.
Suspected al-Qaeda militants carried out a suicide bomb attack at the Abdul Rab mosque during the funeral of Mawlavi Abdullah Fayaz, an anti-Taliban cleric.  There were many military, police, and government officials in attendance.  Mohammed Akram, Kabul's police chief was killed in the blast.
A suicide car bomb exploded outside a restaurant where several Iraqi security personnel, including the bodyguards of Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister Roj Shaways, were eating. The blast occurred in Tuz Khormato. At least twelve people were killed, including one of the Prime Ministers bodyguards, and forty were injured.  Nearby cars and the restaurant were also damaged.  The attack was claimed by the Ansar al-Sunnah Army.
Gunmen opened fire from three cars in a crowded market area in Baghdad. Nine Iraqis were killed in the attack.  The attack occurred in an ethnically mixed community.
A roadside bomb exploded near the convoy of Brigadier Nawzat al-Barazanchi, commander of the Oil Establishment Protection directorate in Kirkuk. The attack occurred in Kirkuk. Al-Barazanchi was not injured in the attack, but one vehicle in the convoy was damaged. Officials in the oil industry are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
A Shiite cleric, Ali Abdul Hessien, was shot by gunmen outside his home in Basra.  No further details are provided.
A group of six armed men ambushed the mayor of Aguacatan, Pablo Escobar Mendez.  Although the mayor was not hurt in the attack, one of his bodyguards, Francisco Velasquez, and an unidentified civilian were killed, and six others, including his wife, Adela Isabel Alcon, and bodyguard Marcario Mendoza were injured.  It is not known what motivated the attack or who carried it out.
Several mortars were fired at the Lebanese Embassy in Baghdad. The attack did not cause any damage or casualties.
Two men, dressed in civilian clothes, riding on a motorcycle, threw a grenade into a furniture shop in Phnom Penh.  The Cambodian government believes this attack and two other grenade attacks, were the work of 'terrorists'.  The attacks coincides with news that a leader of the Cambodian Freedom Fighters (CFF) was arrested in the U.S.
Salam Abdul-Karim, a Sunni cleric in the city of Basra, was kidnapped by armed men in police uniforms. Two days later, he was found shot to death.
The police chief of Babil was the target of an assassination attempt when gunmen attacked his convoy first with a car bomb and then with gunfire. Colonel Salam al-Mamuri was not injured, but three gunmen and two policemen were killed. Six persons were arrested in connection with the attack.
A holiday villa, belonging to a French national, was targeted in an attack in Saint Florent, Haute-Corse department, on the island of Corsica.  This was one of two homes that suffered major damage on the island on this night.  The Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC)-Union of Combatants claimed responsibility for twenty-one attacks on this day, but it is unclear if this attack was one of those claimed.
A petrol bomb was thrown at a house in Quickthorn Place, in Coleraine.  The device, which was made of flammable liquid, failed to ignite.  This and another petrol bomb attack in the area on this evening are being treated as sectarian.
Boonjan Saiphet, a Buddhist plantation worker was beheaded in Yaha, in Yala province.  The victim's body was found in a fruit orchard and his head was found nearby on a roadside, along with a note that read, you arrested innocent people, so I kill innocent people.  Police discovered bullet shells nearby, but the body had no bullet wounds.
On June 6, 2005, three police personnel were killed when Indian-Maoists (Naxalites) set off a remote-detonated landmine in the Gadchiroli district of Maharashtra in India. The police were traveling for an awareness program against the Naxalites in the Angara area.
Palestinian militants fired several mortars at the Sederot settlement. The mortars landed on a house, causing damage, but no injuries. The attack was claimed by Hamas, who said that the attack was retaliation for a visit by Jews to the Al Aqsa Mosque site on the previous day.
Two Qassam rockets were fired at the Netzer Hazani settlement. No damage or injuries were reported. The attack was claimed by the military wing of Hamas. The attack was said to be retaliation for recent raids by Israel Defense Force troops and the visit of Jews to the Al-Aqsa mosque compound.
Two Qassam rockets were fired at Kfar Aza ettlement. No injuries were reported. This was one of several attacks launched at settlements on this day. Palestinian militants claimed many of these attacks as retaliation for Israel Defense Force attacks on Palestinian targets. This attack was not claimed.
A convoy of trucks driven by Iraqis carrying supplies for US military forces was ambushed by gunmen west of Baghdad, in Habaniyah. The convoy was being escorted by employees of Hart Security, LTD., a Cyprus-based British security firm. Hart Security confirmed the ambush.  The attack killed at least seven people. The trucks were damaged by bullet holes and some were set on fire. Several of the trucks were also plundered by bystanders.  The attack was claimed by a group calling itself the Al-Jihad Brigades.
Two Industry Ministry officials were killed when gunmen opened fire on them in Baghdad's New Baghdad neighborhood.
A car bomb exploded in Baqubah in the middle of a long line of cars waiting for gas at a petrol station. The attacked killed three civilians and wounded one other. Long gas lines are common in Iraq due to disruptions in oil shipping and production. Several nearby cars were also damaged.
An Iraqi police major, Kudayr Muhammad al-Jughayfi, was kidnapped by unknown gunmen in Hadithah. His body was found one day later in the same city.
The head of the anti-corruption and counter-terrorism department in Kirkuk, Col. Rahim Othman Said, was assassinated, along with his deputy, Lt. Col. Ghanem Jayad Jabbar when gunmen opened fire on their vehicle.
A 56-year-old woman was attacked in her home in the Mosside area of Ballymoney.  The woman was in her bed, when a group of masked attackers entered her home and beat her with baseball bats.  The victim suffered severe bruising on her arms and body.  Authorities believe this attack has a link to loyalists, though they are still investigating the motive.
A Molotov cocktail was thrown at an office of the ruling New Democracy (ND) in Alimos, a suburb of Athens.  The attackers, two men, threw the device into a window at the office, where it detonated, causing minor damages.  Fire fighters were able to extinguish the flames caused by the blast before major damages or injuries were caused.
Suspected militants set fire to nine public places in Pattani province.  One of these attacks occurred at a teachers' flat in Yaring district.  There were no reported casualties.  Authorities believe that all these incidents were a part of a wave of violence that has swept over the region since January 2004.
Police Col. Karim al-Daraji, who is also the dean of the Basra police academy, was assassinated along with his brother Sami al-Daraji who is also a police officer, when gunmen opened fire on them in Basra.
An explosive device detonated at the surgery center of elected official, Sauveur Gandolfi-Scheit.  Gandolfi-Scheit is the mayor of Biguglia and has been outspoken about calling for tougher punishments for perpetrators of attacks on the island of Corsica.  Only three weeks earlier, Gandolfi-Scheit's town hall was also damaged in a similar attack.  The Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC)- of 22 October, claimed responsibility for this attack.  In the group's statement of claim, they wrote, it is exceptional that we take action against a work place but in this instance we could not remain silent in the face of the repeated position taken by the mayor of Biguglia.
A 15 kilogram explosive device was found and defused at a public works service office in Sungai Padi.  The device had been planted in a fire extinguisher.  This attack occurred over a weekend that saw an increase in separatist violence.  Authorities believe the perpetrators are seeking to cause as many incidents as possible for the members of the Organization of Islamic Conference (OIC) who are in the area assessing the situation.
A school building in Mai Kaen district was set on fire by unknown arsonists.  The fire damaged the building, it was unclear if there were any casualties caused.  This attack occurred over a weekend that saw an increase in separatist violence.  Authorities believe the perpetrators are seeking to cause as many incidents as possible for the members of the Organization of Islamic Conference (OIC) who are in the area assessing the situation.
Gunmen opened fire on a minibus, carrying Iraqi construction workers who worked on projects for US and Iraqi military forces, killing eleven people and wounding three others. The attack occurred in Diyara.
Several shots were fired at the home of a senior Palestinian security officer, Brig, Gen. Rashid Abu Shbak. No one was injured in the attack. The attack comes amid rising tension between militant groups and Palestinian authorities.
Bomb disposal units discovered and defused a 15kg bomb that was planted at a health center station in Pattani province.  An electric wire was found sticking out of the ground at the site and the bomb experts were called in.  Fearing that the device might be detonated by remote-control, the sappers had to detonate the bomb themselves.  The operation took five hours and damaged a wall, a flag pole and the front of the health building.  This attack occurred over a weekend that saw an increase in separatist violence.  Authorities believe the perpetrators are seeking to cause as many incidents as possible for the members of the Organization of Islamic Conference (OIC) who are in the area assessing the situation.
Insurgents fired three mortar rounds at a home in Baghdad where the funeral for the mother of Major General Rashid Fleya, a senior Iraqi security official, was taking place. The attack killed one person and wounded thirteen others. An attack on police investigating the incident occurred soon after. The attack occurred in Baghdad.
A patrol of the Rapid Deployment Forces was attacked by gunmen near Samarra. Four members of the patrol were wounded in the attack.
At least seven bombs exploded in Iran on a single day, killing a total of at least ten people and wounding over eighty. The bombs exploded in two cities, Tehran, where one person was killed and four injured, and Ahvaz, were nine died and over seventy-five injured.  Ahvaz is a city located near the Iraqi border, where the majority of Irans oil reserves are located. The explosions in Ahvaz occurred first. The attack occurs only one week before elections are to be held in the country.  Three separate groups initially claimed responsibility for the attacks in Ahvaz: Arbav Martyrs of Khuzestan, The Arab Peoples Democratic Front, and Afwaj al-Nahdah al-Musallahah Al-Ahwaz. A fourth group, the Arab Struggle Movement for Liberating Ahvaz, later also issued a claim of responsibility for the attack. Iranian authorities blamed Iraqi and US groups for the blasts. No one had claimed the Tehran blasts, although several suspects had been arrested. As of June 14, at least six suspects had been arrested in connection with the blasts and others were under investigation.  The fourth Ahvaz bomb was planted in a handbag on the street near the home of the head of the provincial radio and television station. The bomb exploded as experts tried to defuse it.NOTE: Casualty numbers are for all four blasts in this city on this day.In August 2005, Iranian officials announced that they had arrested several suspects in connection with the attacks, and that the suspects admitted involvement in separatist groups and connections with foreign intelligence services, including the British intelligence agency.On October 30, Iranian intelligence officials announced that 30 of the suspects arrested in connection with the attacks had confessed to their involvement in these bombings and the ones in October 2005.
At least seven bombs exploded in Iran on a single day, killing a total of at least ten people and wounding over eighty. The bombs exploded in two cities, Tehran, where one person was killed and four injured, and Ahvaz, were nine died and over seventy-five injured.  Ahvaz is a city located near the Iraqi border, where the majority of Irans oil reserves are located. The explosions in Ahvaz occurred first. The attack occurs only one week before elections are to be held in the country.   Three separate groups initially claimed responsibility for the attacks in Ahvaz: Arbav Martyrs of Khuzestan, The Arab Peoples Democratic Front, and Afwaj al-Nahdah al-Musallahah Al-Ahwaz. A fourth group, the Arab Struggle Movement for Liberating Ahvaz, later also issued a claim of responsibility for the attack. Iranian authorities blamed Iraqi and US groups for the blasts. No one had claimed the Tehran blasts, although several suspects had been arrested. As of June 14, at least six suspects had been arrested in connection with the blasts and others were under investigation.  The third Tehran bomb exploded in Imam Hossein Square, shattering windows of cars and nearby homes, but no injuries were caused.In August 2005, Iranian officials announced that they had arrested several suspects in connection with the attacks, and that the suspects admitted involvement in separatist groups and connections with foreign intelligence services, including the British intelligence agency.
On June 12, 2005, suspected Maoist of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) insurgents shot dead a social activist and chief of Jana Priya Campus, Ganeshman Palikhe, and his two security guards in the western town of Pokhara. Earlier, the pro-Maoist student body, Akhil Krantikari, alleged that Palikhe had defied their call to close down educational institutions in the past.
A second explosive device was found on a sidewalk on Dhemlousou Street, in Viron.  The device had been left next to a notice board, in an obvious spot.  Bomb experts were called in and safely dismantled the device, which could not have exploded because the detonator had been attached backwards.  This was one of two devices left in obvious places on this day.  No warning was made for either bomb, but authorities believe that the locations in which they were planted indicate that the perpetrators did not want anyone to be injured.
Gunmen assassinated a female employee of the Iraqi Interior Ministry in Baghdad.  No further information is available.
A Qassam rocket was fired at a Gaza Strip settlement. It landed in an open field and did not cause any damage or casualties.
Several mortars were fired at a Jewish settlement in the Qatif Bloc. One mortar landed in the backyard of a house. No one was injured in the attack.
A low-powered explosive charge detonated at a bakery owned by Toussaint Galli, the chairman of the Guild Chamber of Haute-Corse department.  The attack took place in Bastia and caused slight damage to the premises.  Galli beat a number of nationalists in the recent election and an appeal was filed at the Bastia administrative court for the election to be cancelled.  Last week, a government official rejected the appeal.
On June 13, 2005, in Soruwila, Polonnaruwa district of Sri Lanka, at the funeral home of a member of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), an unknown person threw a grenade which killed one person and injured fifteen others. It is believed that the attack was carried out by rival organization, the Colonel Karuna Group.
On June 13, 2005, in Bagmara in the Rajshahi district of Bangladesh, Mazzal Hossain was tortured to death by the Jagrata Muslim Janata Bangladesh (JMJB). Hossain was a former member of the JMJB but had left the group following a police raid in January 2005.
In the Uchidiha VDC area of the Bara district in Nepal, Maoists (from the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists- CPN-M) used a socket bomb to disrupt a wedding, injuring eleven civilians.
Insurgents launched a mortar attack against a police station in the town of Kanaan, near Baqubah. No injuries were reported in the attack, but the attack was followed by a car bombing on security personnel responding to the mortar attack which did cause fatalities. The attack was claimed by Ansar al-Sunnah Army.
A small explosive device exploded on a main street in the Southern Iranian city of Zahedan. The blast broke the windows of several nearby cars and houses, but caused no injuries. This was one of three small explosions in Zahedan over a period of several hours. The attack comes two day after seven bombs exploded in Ahvaz and Tehran, killing ten people and wounding over eighty and less than a week before elections in the country.
On the night of June 14, 2005, a rocket was fired at the capital of the Zabol Province, Qalat. No causalities were reported. The rocket hit a store near a Provincial Reconstruction Team office, the presumed target of the attack. Although no group has claimed responsibility for the attack, the Taliban has recently carried out similar attacks.
Gunmen in Kahlis assassinated two senior anti-terrorist police officers. The two officers were killed when the gunmen opened fire on their vehicle as it was driving in Khalis. Also killed in the attack were the officers' driver and the son of one of the men.
Insurgents detonated an explosive device on the Jadiriyah Bridge in Baghdad as an oil tanker passed. The explosion set the fuel tank on fire, but caused no injuries. The oil industry in Iraq is a frequent target of insurgent attacks.
An explosive device was left planted under the vehicle of a border police officer in Yaha, in Yala province.  The device was made up of explosives, fertilizer, potassium nitrate and a telephone SIM card.  There were no reported casualties.
An explosive device was detonated in the southeastern Iranian city of Zahedan. The incident comes two days after three other devices were detonated in the city and four days after seven bombs exploded in Tehran and Ahvaz. The incident also comes two days before elections are to be held in country. No injuries were reported and it was unclear exactly where in the city the device was detonated.
On June 15, 2005, in the Gandoh area of the Doda district of Kashmir, terrorists attacked the home of Shakeela Begum, who is the sister of the Union Parliamentary Affairs and Urban Development Minister Ghulam Nabi Azad. The terrorists stole two AK rifles and ammunition of her security officers.  There were no reported casualties.
An Iraqi contractor working with US forces, Saed Rasul, was kidnapped by a group calling itself the Shura Council of the Mujahedeen of Iraq, the same group that held Australian contractor Dougals Wood. Rasul was freed in the operation that freed Wood in Baghdad on June 15. It is unclear when Rasul was kidnapped. NOTE: INCIDENT DATE UNKNOWN
Palestinian militants fired two rockets into the Israeli settlement of Sederot. One of the rockets hit a college campus and the other damaged an empty fire truck. The attack did not cause any injuries. The attack was claimed by the armed wing of the Islamic Jihad movement which said the attack was in response to the recent arrest of six Islamic Jihad members.
A remote-detonated car bomb exploded near an Iraqi police patrol in Kirkuk. The attack injured five soldiers and four civlians.
On Thursday, June 16, 2005, Taliban attackers shot dead tribal leader, Haji Abdul Wahid, at his house in Maiwand district of Kandahar. The Taliban spokesman described Wahid as a spy for the US troops.
On June 16, 2005, Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) members bombed the Thati bazaar at the district headquarters of Beni.  No further information is provided.
Abdulloh Suwanno, a member of the Southern Border Provinces Peace-building Command (SBPPC) was shot and killed in Rangae, as he traveled to his post, guarding the Ban Tanyonglimo school.  The victim was attacked by two perpetrators, riding on a motorcycle.
A pipe bomb exploded under a parked car in a parking garage in the Las Fundaciones building.  The car, belonging to the manager of the Nissan Corporation, was damaged but no one was injured in the attack.  It is unknown who carried out the attack or what motivated it.  Another pipe bomb exploded almost simultaneously in another part of Caracas.
On June 17, 2005, in Batticalao, Sri Lanka, a police officer and a member of the People's Liberation Organization of Tamil Eelam (PLOTE) were injured by a grenade from an unknown attacker.
Five mortar shells were fired on the Neve Deqalim settlement. No injuries were reported. The attack was claimed by the military wing of Hamas which said the attack was retaliation for violence against Palestinians by Israeli settlers. The attack comes amid increased violence in the region and discussions/negotiations between Israeli and Palestinian leaders about the upcoming Gaza pullout.
Two Iraqi contractors who own an asphalt factory and work with US forces, providing them with construction materials, were found dead on a road in Dujail, south of Tikrit. Contractors who work with US forces are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
A rocket-propelled grenade was launched at a police station in Kirkuk. One officer was killed and four wounded in the attack. One civilian was also injured in the attack.
Sunni tribal leader Sheikh Arkan Shaalan Jassim al-Edwan was assassinated by unknown gunmen who shot him and left his body outside of his village near Mahmoudiya.
A home in the mainly nationalist area of Old Throne Park, in north Belfast, was seriously damaged by a fire, which police speculate was caused by arson.  The victim, Pete McCall, says he and his family will move from the area as a result of the attack.  Police believe the fire was started when an oil tank in the backyard was set alight.  One man was injured in the blaze.  Local residents are blaming the attack on loyalists.
Niwat Chukaew, a school director, and his companion, Boonsong Payansaeng, were both shot and seriously injured in Yala province.  This was one in a number of attacks over the weekend in the southern provinces.  Authorities have noted that insurgents have changed their tactics, now attacking set targets and blending in with the population, instead of escaping into the jungle, as in the past.
A car bomb exploded as an Iraqi police convoy passed by in Baghdad. Nearby civilian cars were set on fire by the explosion. At least two people were killed and fifteen others injured. The attack was claimed by Abu Musab al-Zarqawi's group, Tanzim Qaidat Al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn.
Militants attacked a convoy of the American-Iraq Solution group, a US contractor, near Ramadi. In the attack, the insurgents killed one contractor, Binkumar Gurung, along with six of his Iraqi guards. Two other guards were kidnapped. The Ansar al-Sunnah Army claimed responsibility for the attack and released pictures of Gurung's identification. The statement said the man was Japanese. The statement also said that the men of the convoy were given the choice to surrender or be killed, but started to open fire on the Ansar al-Sunnah members and so were killed.  The whereabouts of the two kidnapped victims is unknown.
On the night of June 19, 2005, two people were killed and five people injured due to a Taliban attack in the Helmand Province. The two persons killed were the District Governor of the Washir District and a policeman. Those injured were police officers.
On the night of June 19, 2005, Communist Party of India-Maoists (CPI-M), also known as Naxalites, killed eight civilians and injured 100 others near the Kotrapal village in the Dantewada district of India. The villagers had just returned from a multi-village meeting called to oppose the Naxalites.
Palestinians fired five mortars at Israel settlements in Qatif Bloc. No injuries were reported. The attacks come amid a period of increased violence in the region.
A suicide car bomb exploded when it crashed into the vehicle carrying the security chief of Halabja and three of his bodyguards. The security chief and all three bodyguards were killed in the attack.  The Ansar al-Sunnah Army claimed responsibility for all attacks in Halabja, this is assumed to be one of them.
Two Palestinian teenagers threw Molotov cocktails at the Bet Orot Yeshiva (a school where Jewish children study the Torah) in Jerusalem's al-Tur neighborhood. The bottles shattered and exploded outside the Yeshiva, but no casualties or damages were caused. The two boys were arrested.
Three Qassam rockets were fired at the Nahal Oz settlement. No injuries or damages were reported. The attack was claimed by the military wing of Hamas. The attack comes amid increasing violence in the region, a summit between Palestinian leader Abbas and Israeli leader Sharon concerning the upcoming Gaza pullout, and the failure of the two sides to reach an agreement extending the ceasefire that has been in effect the past few months.
On June 20, 2005 in the Shurwa Ab Khorma region of the Farah province in Afghanistan, armed attackers killed Heart-Kandahar Highway Police Commander Ghulam Mohammad and injured four of his men, while they were traveling in a vehicle. It is unsure if the attack was carried out by Taliban or Al-Qa'ida.
In the Rajouri district of Kashmir, terrorists attacked a joint patrol party of police and Village Defense Committee members. No injuries or deaths were reported.
The former leader of the Lebanese Communist Party who has been a critic of Syria's power in Lebanon, George Hawi, was assassinated when a bomb that had been planted in his car exploded as he drove in Beirut. The one-pound  bomb appears to have been detonated remotely and was planted under his seat. Hawi's driver, Thabet Bazzi, was slightly wounded in the attack. Opposition leaders blamed pro-Syrian forces for involvement in the attack. Investigators had arrested at least five people in connection with the attack. All five men were Syrian nationals and eyewitnesses claim they were hiding on the roof of a building near the site of an explosion during the attack. Police had also searched the home of Brig. General Mustafa Hamdan, one of several pro-Syrian security chiefs accused by opposition leaders of involvement in recent assassinations.  The attack comes two days after national elections that gave the anti-Syrian opposition a majority in Lebanon's parliament. It is also the third in a string of bombings against those critical of Syria, including the assassination of former Prime Minister Hariri in February and of opposition journalist Samir Kassir in early June.
Chamnarn Thepsuwan, a civil-defense volunteer, was shot and later died in the hospital.  Four unidentified attackers fired at the victim while he was riding home.  One of the attackers was reportedly wearing the traditional outfit of a Muslim woman.
A Turkish contractor who works with US forces was kidnapped by an unknown group of gunmen. The group did not release its name, but did announce the kidnapping and give the Turkish government three days to stop support for coalition forces in Iraq. The group released a video showing the hostage and his passport.  The victim's whereabouts are unknown.
A man identified as Mullah Qasem was arrested after firing a rocket at an airport in the Farah Province, by soldiers of Military Corps No 207. Qasem was attempting to fire another rocket when captured, but had burnt himself while firing the first rocket. The rocket launcher was attached to a motorcycle.
Seven separate fires were started at St. John's Church in Portadown, in an attempt to burn down the premises.  All seven of the fires burned themselves out without fully catching and only caused smoke damage to the church.  No further information is available.
Palestinian militants opened fire at a building where Prime Minister Ahmed Qureia was speaking in Nablus. No one was injured in the attack. This was one of two attacks on the Prime Minister on this day.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol that includes a special operations unit exploded near Madain, killing two officers and wounding two others.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives near an Interior Ministry convoy outside the home of the deputy Interior Minister, Major General Hussein Kamal, in Baghdad. The attack wounded three civilians. It was unclear whether the attack targeted Kamal or the convoy.  The attack was claimed by the group loyal to Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, Tanzim Qaidat Al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn, and by Ansar al-Sunnah Army. It was unclear whether the groups were working together or whether the claims were competing.
Yatha Maseng, a former provincial councilor, was shot and gravely injured, as he rode his motorcycle home from his shrimp farm in Ban Panare, Pattani province.  No further information is available.
On June 22, 2005, members of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) threw a grenade at civilians in Trincomalee in Sri Lanka, injuring three Sinhalese civilians.
On the night of June 22, 2005, Taliban rebels attacked a vehicle carrying six individuals, killing 3 of them, near the Chora district of Afghanistan. The three men killed were Afghanistan provincial council candidate Haji Mohammed Wali and his two bodyguards. Taliban officials admit responsibility for the attack, and also claim setting fire to the vehicle after the 3 living individuals from the car escaped.
An explosive device was detonated by a mobile phone on the Pattani-Narathiwat highway, about 100 meters from a Border Police base.  The bomb was tied to the spare tire of a cargo container.  The blast damaged the vehicle, but caused no injuries.
An oil pipeline that carries oil from Kirkuk to Bayji was attacked by insurgents who planted an explosive charge under the pipeline. When the device exploded, it damaged the pipeline and caused an oil spill and large fire. Oil pipelines in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
A car bomb attack was prevented when a bomb was defused outside the Mubarak mosque in Baghdad. This comes on a day when five bombs exploded in Baghdad, several in front of other Shiite mosques.
Four bombs detonated almost simultaneously at four different district offices in Yala province.  One of these devices exploded at the Bannang Star District Offices.  No further information is available.
Five Shiites, poultry vendors on a trip to buy poultry for resale in Baghdad, were kidnapped by unknown gunmen. The bodies of the men were later found near Baghdad.  The attack took place in an area referred to as the Triangle of Death where there has been a significant increase in ethnic violence over the past year.
On June 24, 2005, the Taliban claimed to have fired mortar rounds at the Kandahar airport in the afternoon and late night, damaging the airport's control tower. The Taliban reports have not been confirmed by coalition forces.
A mosque in the town of Brahmanbaria, in the East Kandipara area, was set on fire by unknown perpetrators.  Another mosque was targeted nearby and together two members of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Jamaat were injured (reports do not disaggregate these numbers).
Palestinians lauched several mortars at the Netzarim settlement in the Gaza Strip. The attack injured on Israeli settler. The attack comes amid increased violence in the region and the failure of Palestinian and Israeli leaders to reach an agreement on the terms of an extended ceasefire.
Gunmen assassinated Lt. Col. Majid Faisl Aziz, a member of the Interior Ministry major crimes unit, opening fire on him when he was driving in Baghdad.
Gunmen assassinated Samir Baghdadi, a senior aide to cleric Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, and two of his bodyguards. Gunmen opened fire on the vehicle in which Baghdadi was driving to Karbala, killing the three men.
On June 24, 2005, the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) killed police officer Puna Gogoi at Talap Bazaar in the Tinsukia district of India. Gogoi reportedly had been involved in a recent encounter in the Dibrugarh district in which three ULFA members were killed.
A suicide bomber followed by five vehicles filled with insurgents crashed into a wall outside the home of Lt. Muthana al-Shaker, an Iraqi special operations police officer, in Samarra. The blast killed nine bystanders, but did not injure al-Shaker. This was one of two attempted attacks in al-Shaker.
Three police officers on patrol were assassinated by gunmen who opened fire on their patrol south of Amarah.
Three Quds-1 rockets were fired at the Mordekhay settlement in Gaza Strip. The attack did not cause any injuries or damages. The attack was claimed by Islamic Jihad and was in retaliation for recent raids against Islamic Jihad militants by Israel Defense Forces. The attack comes as settlers prepare for the Gaza pullout.
Dolo Sae-ngao, a village security volunteer, was shot eleven times by insurgents and killed.  The attack happened on the Patae-Lakkhet road in Yaha district, Yala province.  The attackers overtook the victim's motorcycle, shooting at him the entire time.  After the victim was killed, the attackers stole his pistol before fleeing the scene.
On the night of June 25, 2005, two rockets were fired at the home of Balochistan Chief Minister Jam Muhammad Yousuf in Quetta, Pakistan. Neither the Chief Minister's wife or daughter, who were both at the residence at the time of the attack, were injured. However, another person suffered minor injuries and the house was badly damaged. The perpetrators are unknown, but appear to have come in a truck from a hilly area of Kalat, about 140 kilometers southeast of Quetta.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives in a parking lot outside an Iraqi army base in Mosul where civilian contractors were arriving for work. The attack killed sixteen people and wounded up to sixteen others.  This was one of three suicide bombings in Mosul on this day.  The attack was claimed by the group loyal to al-Zarqawi, Tanzim Qaidat Al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn.
Two explosive charges planted by the roadside were detonated near a police patrol in Kirkuk. The blast injured two members of the patrol.  The blast occurred only a few moments after an earlier explosive, which had been planted on a dog, exploded on the same road.
Israeli settlers set fire to a shop owned by a Palestinian, near the Cave of the Patriarchs in Hebron. The attack comes as settlers prepare for the upcoming Gaza pullout.
On June 26, 2005,United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) members triggered an improvised explosive device in the city of Guwahati, India, injuring twelve people, including six members of the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF). It occurred in front of the CRPF Group Center, and damaged three shops and three motorbikes.  On June 27, 2005, two people, Arun Kumar and Sanjay Basfor, who were injured from this attack died from their injuries at the Guwahati Medical College Hospital.
A roadside bomb targeting a police convoy exploded in Antar Square in Baghdad. The bomb missed the police convoy but killed two civlians.
Two Quds-1 rockets were fired at the Neve Deqalim settlement. The attack did not cause any injuries or damage. The attack was claimed by Islamic Jihad. The group said the attack was in retaliation for continued raids by Israel Defense Forces against Islamic Jihad militants. The attack comes as settlers prepare for the upcoming Gaza pullout.
Abdulkodae Mahamayading, a member of the Lubosawo tambon administration organization, was shot and killed by six unknown attackers.  The perpetrators fired on the victim from the back of a pick-up truck.  Police say this attack and two others in the area on this day, was a part of ongoing unrest in the South.
In Bijbehara, Kashmir, police arrested Bilal Ahmed Magray, member of Hizbul Mujahideen (HM), before he could throw a grenade at the Minister of State for Home, Abdur Rehman Veeri.
On June 27, 2005, a police officer and his carbine were reported missing after an encounter with Communist Party of India-Maoists (CPI-M) in the Sitamarhi district of Bihar. The Deputy Inspector General of Police said it was likely that the two had been kidnapped.  Later, the police officer was identified as Rajendra Singh who was eventually killed in the forest in the Bihar district of India.
Three engineers who work for the North Oil Company were killed and one wounded when a bomb exploded near their vehicle in Kirkuk. Employees of the oil industry are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
A car bomb targeting an Iraqi quick-reaction police force exploded in Baqubah. Five people were killed and nine injured in the attack.
A group of unidentified gunmen opened fire at a teachers' housing unit, injuring one man, Sunthorn Nilwisut who is a teacher at the Ban Kalubee school in Sako.  The victim was reported to be in stable condition at the hospital.  This incident took place in Sunai Padi, where thirteen teachers live.
A Qassam rocket was fired at a Qatif bloc settlement. The rocket hit a residential building causing significant damage to the building. One woman suffered from shock. The attack comes as settlers prepare for the Gaza pullout.
In Farahabad, within the district of Mahabubnagar, Andhra Pradesh, India, Communist Party of India-Maoists (CPI-M) set fire to three buses. The attack was in protest against a recent skirmish with police in the area in which one Maoist was killed.
On the night of June 28, 2005, the home of Gol Mohammad, the Sorkan district security commander of the Konar Province in Afghanistan, was attacked by a remote-controlled device. Mohammad was killed and two family members were injured. The perpetrators are unknown but officials believe the Taliban is behind the attack.
Surin Somjit, a Buddhist water company foreman, was shot three times and then decapitated by an unknown number of assailants in Narathiwat's Rangae district.
A car bomb exploded near a police convoy in Baqubah. The bomb was one of two targeting this police patrol. One person was killed and three wounded, all civilians, in the combined bombings.
A bomb targeting several police officers exploded outside the Sadeer hotel in Baghdad. Three police officers were wounded in the incident.
A Qassam rocket was fired at the Neve Deqalim settlement. No injuries or damages were reported. This was one of several attacks by Palestinians on Israeli settlements on this day. The attack comes amid increased violence in the region and clashes between Palestinians and Israeli settlers in the lead up to the Gaza pullout. The attack was claimed by the military wing of Hamas.
A Qassam rocket and five mortars were fired at the Ganey Tal settlement. No injuries or damages were reported. This was one of several attacks by Palestinians on Israeli settlements on this day. The attack comes amid increased violence in the region and clashes between Palestinians and Israeli settlers in the lead up to the Gaza pullout. The attack was claimed by the military wing of Hamas.
Israeli settlers, extremists (some from the outlawed Kach Movement) who have been protesting the Gaza pullout and living in abandoned Palestinian homes, attacked the home of Palestinians in the al-Mawasi area with stones. The attack came after police tried to force the Israeli settlers to leave and arrested nine people during a raid. Palestinian settlers returned the Israeli's stones with their own volley of stones. One Palestinian was seriously injured and four others moderately injured. One Israeli and one soldier were also injured in the attack. The violence comes amid increased tension in the region in the lead up to the Gaza pullout.  On July 2, police arrested Shimshon Sitron, an 18 year old West Bank resident, the primary suspect in the stoning of the most seriously injured victim.  On July 14, Sitron and one other Israeli were charged in court, Sitron with attempted murder and the other with aggravated assault.
Two sisters, Narmin and Namam Hasan Rahman, who worked at the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan party headquarters in Mosul, were assassinated when gunmen opened fire on them as they walked to work.
On June 30, 3005, two terrorists beat to death Mohammed Abbas, a porter for the security forces, in his house in the Poonch district of Kashmir.
On July 4, 2005, in Chandel, India, unknown militants attacked an Assam Rifles security patrol, injuring five members of the police force. Officials say the militants detonated three remote-controlled bombs and also opened fire on the patrol.
Armed gunmen stormed a Sunni mosque in Baghdad and kidnapped the imam, Sheik Amer al-Tikriti during Friday prayers.  The victim's whereabouts are unknown.
An Iraqi civilian employee of the Defense Ministry was assassinated by gunmen who opened fire on him in Baghdad. The employee was identified as Amir Rahim.
A two kilogram time bomb was found in front of the Gebze Police Station.  The device, which was made up of TNT and C-4, was found at 7:00 and was primed to detonate at 8:00.  Police were able to destroy the bomb without any casualties or damages caused.
On July 1, 2005, a group of unknown assailants shot an Executive Engineer of the Public Works Department in his leg in the Imphal district.
The Egyptian envoy to Iraq, Ihadal-Sharif, was kidnapped by gunmen in Baghdad as he stopped to buy a newspaper. He was to become the first Arab diplomat with the official title of Ambassador to Iraq. Witnesses said the attackers called al-Sharif an 'American spy.'  This was one of several attacks on foreign diplomats over a five day time period.  The kidnapping was claimed by the group loyal to Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn. In their claim, the group showed pictures of al-Sharif's ID cards, a driver's license and a Foreign Ministry ID. In a later statement posted on the same day, the group threatened to kill al-Sharif and linked his kidnapping to Egypt's announcement that it would be the first Arab government to upgrade its mission in Iraq to a full embassy.  On July 7, the group released a statement that they had killed al-Shari and released a video that showed al-Sharif, blind-folded, identifying himself. The statement also said that the group hoped to kidnap and kill other diplomats. In response to several confirmations of the envoy's death, Egypt announced it would close its mission in Iraq and recall all its personnel. It was unclear if this would be a permanent move.  On July 9, US forces captured Khamis Farhan Khalaf Abd al-Fahdawi, known as Abu Seba, who is suspected of involvement in the kidnapping and assassination during a raid in Ramadi.  On Saturday July 23, another video of al-Sherif was released in which he answers questions about the legal status of the Sinai peninsula. The video was released on the same day as three coordinated bomb attacks occurred in the tourist popular city of Sharm el-Sheik, in Egypt's Sinai peninsula. It was not clear when the video was made, but al-Sherif was wearing the same shirt as that he wore in the previous July 7 video.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosive belt at a police checkpoint in Hillah. He detonated the device while being searched by members of the Scorpion police command. Six police officers were killed in the attack. This was one of two bombings in Hillah within ten minutes of each other. The second targeted police and civilians who arrived at the scene of the first blast. Both attacks were claimed by al-Zarqawi's group, Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn.
A remotely detonated car bomb exploded near a police station and patrol standing outside the station in Baghdad. The attack wounded nine people, including two police officers.
Three explosive devices detonated, almost simultaneously, in Pristina.  All three targets are located only 500 yards from each other.  The third device detonated at an office that houses the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).  There were no reported injuries and no warning threat was received prior to the blast.  The AP is reporting that an unnamed group claimed responsibility for all three blasts.
On July 2, 2005, Communist Party of India-Maoists, also known as (Janashakti) Naxalites, bombed the Girijan cooperative office in the Karminagar district of India. The office was destroyed by the bucket bombs.
On July 3, 2005, an improvised explosive device damaged a culvert in the district of Baramulla, Kashmir. The explosion was timed for a traveling group which included the Minister for Rural Development and State Congress chief Peerzada Mohammad Sayeed and Minister for Public Works Department Ghulam Ahmed Mir. Four police officers were wounded from the explosion.  Later, the attack was claimed by Hizbul Mujahideen (HM).
Three Quds-1 rockets were fired at the Netzer Hazani settlement in Gaza. The attack did not cause any damage or injuries. The attack was claimed by Islamic Jihad, in retaliation for recent Israel Defense Forces arrests of Islamic Jihad militants. This was one of several recent attacks by the group. The attack comes amid increased violence and tension in the region in the lead up to the Gaza pullout.
Gunmen assassinated Shiite cleric Adil al-Janabi and one of his bodyguards when they opened fire on him in Baghdad.
The Animal Liberation Front (ALF) claimed responsibility for an arson attack at the Oxford University boathouse, which caused over $1 million in damages.  Over twenty rowing boats were destroyed, and the interior of the boathouse was gutted.  The perpetrators broke into the boathouse, sprinkled the premises with gasoline and left incendiary devices to explode inside.  The ALF attacked this site because of Oxford's new animal testing lab and biomedical building.
Jirjis Mohammed Ami, a senior official in the Mosul Branch of the Kurdistan Democratic Party, was killed when gunmen opened fire on him outside his sister's home in Mosul.
Gunmen assassinated an Iraqi contactor who worked as a painter on a US military base. Omar Othman was killed when gunmen opened fire on his car on Baghdad's airport road. The attack also injured Othman's friend, a passenger in the car. Contractors who work with US forces are the frequent target of insurgent attacks in Iraq.
Three individuals adorned in traditional Afghani attire and long beards shot and wounded four people in the municipality of Bouarfa, which is to the south of Blida.  Three of the victims were able to make it to the near by military barracks while the fourth is missing.
A roadside bomb was detonated outside the Iranian embassy in Baghdad, targeting a convoy of US security private contractors. The attack did not cause any injuries.
A missile was fired at the Sederot settlement. The attack did not cause any injuries and the missile landed in an open field. The attack was claimed by the Popular Resistance Committees and comes amid increased tension and violence in the region in the lead up to the Gaza pullout.
On July 5, 2005, two police officers were kidnapped and murdered by the Taliban in the Helmand province of Afghanistan. The Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack.  There has been an increase in Taliban attacks in the run-up to parliamentary elections, scheduled to take place in September.
A police officer was ambushed with machine guns as he exited his home in Pattani province.  The attackers then beheaded the officer and took his head.
Gunmen assassinated Capt. Hazim Jabbar, a member of the police special commando brigade when they opened fire on him in Baghdad. Jabbar worked as a bodyguard for a consultant to former interim Prime Minister Ayad Allawi.
The car of two police commandos was attacked by gunmen in Baghdad as the officers drove to work. One commando was killed and one injured in the attack.
Several mortar shells were fired at Qatif Bloc settlements. No injuries were caused. The attack comes amid increased tension and violence in the region in the lead up to the Gaza pullout.
On July 6, 2005, Syed Bashir Ahmed, the Jammu and Kashmir Minister of State for Public Health Engineering, was attacked while in his car near Srinagar, Kashmir. Although the Minister escaped without injury, three of his guards were injured.
An Islamic teacher, Mirso Jarawae, was killed in Pattani's Sungai Padi District by gunfire.  The victim's body was found next to his motorcycle on a village road.
A mortar was fired at an Israeli settlement in the Gaza Strip. No one was injured in the attack. The attack comes amid increased tension in the region in the lead up to the Gaza pullout.
On July 7, 2005, suspected Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) triggered a socket bomb in Birgunj, Nepal, injuring two people, a social worker and a businessman. No one was killed.  The intended target of the bomb is not stated.
In the most violent day in London history since World War II, over fifty people were killed and about 700 injured in four suicide bomb blasts on public transportation.  Three of the bombers struck the London underground train system, and the fourth detonated on a double-decker bus.  The three train blasts occurred within moments of each other and the bus bombing happened about an hour after the first three.  One of these attacks targeted a train on the Piccadilly line, on train 311 traveling south from King's Cross station to Russell Square at 8:50am.  The bomber, identified as Jamaican-born Germaine Lindsay, detonated his explosives in the first car of the train near a set of double doors.  The blast was strong enough to cause major damage to the second carriage of the train as well.  Twenty-six passengers, plus the bomber were killed in this attack.  Because the train runs deep into the ground at this point of the line, it took rescue workers days to remove all the bodies from the wreckage.  All four attacks occurred at the height of rush hour and on the same day that the G8 summit was scheduled to begin in Scotland.  Multiple groups have claimed responsibility for the attack, including a group calling itself The Secret Organization of Al Qaeda in Europe and the Abu-Hafs al-Masri Brigades, who also claimed responsibility for the Madrid train attacks in March 2004.  Neither claim has been authenticated.  On 12 July, police raided six homes in the Leeds section of the city and carried out controlled explosions and seized materials.  In one of the homes, authorities discovered a bathtub filled with explosives, leading them to believe that further attacks may be likely.  Police also found a car they believe may have been connected to the bombers, in a parking lot in the outskirts of the city.  An Egyptian chemist, Magdi Mahmoud al-Nashar, was arrested in Cairo and questioned in connection with these attacks.
Marije Mellegers, a Dutch citizen, was shot in the leg and wounded while traveling with seven child protection activists in the Aceh province.
On July 8, 2005, in the Gulmi district of Nepal, the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) kidnapped three individuals, including a principal of a school, Chandrakanta Poudel. All three are apparently charged with corruption.
On the night of July 8, 2005, Taliban members killed Mawlawi Agha Jan, a pro-government clergyman, and his wife at their house in Paktika, Afghanistan. Agha Jan was the head of the local Ulema, or Religious Scholars Council.  The weapon used in the attack is unknown.
Several mortars were fired at an Israeli settlement in Negev. The attack did not cause any injuries. The attack comes amid increased violence in the region in the lead up to the Gaza pullout.
The deputy governor of the Diyala province, Aouf Rahoumi, was the target of an assassination attempt when gunmen opened fire on his convoy in Muqdadiyah. No injuries were reported.
Insurgents fired several mortars at Baghdad's Dora oil refinery. One mortar landed on the fuel reservoir, causing it to light on fire. The oil industry in Iraq is the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
An explosive device, which has been described as both a fragmentation bomb and a cluster bomb, detonated at a popular seaside tourist resort, in Cesme.  The blast detonated near a bank branch and injured twenty people, including two foreigners.  The Kurdistan Freedom Hawks (TAK), claimed responsibility for the attack in a phone call to the Mesopotamia News Agency.
A suicide bomber with explosives strapped to his body detonated his explosives at an Iraqi army recruiting center in Baghdad amongst a crowd of about 400 recruits. The attack killed twenty-five people and wounded at least forty-seven others. It was claimed by the group loyal to al-Zarqawi, Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn.
A car bomb was found in Kirkuk, near the scene of an earlier suicide attack. The bomb appeared to target rescue workers and security officials who were arriving to aid victims of the earlier blast. However, the bomb was safely defused.
A security official was killed in Kirkuk by gunmen who shot him.  No further information is provided.
Ahmad Hasan, who worked as a photographer for the media section of the Kurdistan Democratic Party, was assassinated by gunmen who opened fire on him outside his home in Mosul as he left for work.
N.V. Mallaiah Naidu, a village headman of the Congress party, was shot dead by Communist Party of India-Maoists in the Cuddapah district of India on July 10, 2005.
The Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) killed at least fourteen people during an ambush on the road between Kitgum town and the Palamek market.  The LRA looted the people's belongings and then set fire to the vehicle they were traveling in.
Abdulqadir Yahya Shaykh Ali was assassinated at his home in Mogadishu.  Yahya Ali was the director of the Center for Research an Dialogue, a local NGO dedicated to peace. The al-Qaeda affiliated, al-Ittihad, according to street rumors, is responsible; however, others claim that Ethiopian intelligence is responsible for his death.
Gunmen opened fire on a unit of police officers responding to the scene of a car bomb explosion in Kirkuk that killed three and wounded fifteen. The armed attack wounded three police officers, one seriously.
Four near simultaneous bombs detonated at a power station in the Spanish town of Amorebieta.  The devices, which all exploded within ten minutes of each other targeted a soon-to-be-operational power plant.  There were no reported damages or injuries caused, as the blasts took place in the middle of the night.  A caller, representing the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) had warned of the attack prior to any detonations.  ETA officially claimed responsibility for the blast on 20 September 2005.  In their statement, the group called on the Basque government to respect the result of the popular consultation held in Zornotza in which citizens mad clear their decision; to halt the power station.
An Islamic Jihad militant attempted to drive a car bomb into a Jewish settlement in the West Bank. The explosives detonated too early however, and police were able to arrest the suspect. The attempted attack occurred on the same day as another suicide bombing in Israel.
On July 12, 2005, in the Budgam district of Kashmir, a group of unknown terrorists shot and killed Bilal Ahmad, a former militant affiliated with the Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front. Ahmad currently worked for the Agriculture Department.
In the early morning of July 13, 2005, two Taliban gunmen on motorcycles shot and killed Mawlawi Mohammad Saleh, the head of the Helmand Ulema (Religious Scholars) Council, while he was on his way to the local mosque. The Taliban claimed the attack and maintained that Saleh was killed because he supported the new Afghan government.
Gunmen assassinated a member of the Rapid Intervention Force in Baghdad, when they opened fire on him in front of his home.
A suicide car bomber detonated his vehicle near a group of children who were receiving candy from US soldiers in Baghdad. At least twenty-seven people were killed, including eighteen children and one US military personnel. At least seventy others, including three US soldiers were wounded in the attack.  The attack took place in a mainly Shiite Muslim neighborhood and the majority of the casualties were Shiites.  This attack is likely to raise sectarian tensions in the area.
Several gunmen opened fire on the vehicle of the head of the Kirkuk Municipality, Jamal Muhammad, as the vehicle was driving to Baghdad. However, Muhammad was not in the car at the time. His two bodyguards were severely injured in the attack.
Gunmen opened fire at a military inspection center operated by the Basra Governorate and on the Basra Governorate premises. The attack killed one security officer and wounded at least three others.
Four rockets were fired at the Sederot settlement in Gaza Strip. One of the rockets landed on a house in the Netiv Haasara Collective Farm causing material damage to the house, killing one woman, and injuring another person.  Another landed on a parked car.  The attack was claimed by the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades, which is affiliated with Fatah. The group said the attack was in retaliation for the killing of an Islamic Jihad militant. The military wing of Hamas also claimed responsibility for the attack. The attack comes amid increased tension in the region, in the lead up to the Gaza pullout and following a suicide bombing in Israel which led to the closure of Gaza settlements and raids of Palestinian homes by Israel Defense Forces.
Three rockets were fired at the Sederot settlement. The attack was one of several on Israeli settlements on this day and occurs amid increased tension in the region in the lead up to the Gaza pullout. The attack was claimed by Islamic Jihad in statement that said the attacks were in retaliation for 'Zionist crimes,' including most recently raids in Nablus and the killing of an Islamic Jihad militant in the city.
On July 14, 2005, police officer Ranjith Hettige was injured in an armed attack by suspected Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) pistol gang members in Trincomalee, Sri Lanka.
On July 14, 2005, unknown assailants threw a grenade at the security post in the Sittandy area of Batticalao, Sri Lanka. No one was injured from the attack.
On July 14, 2005, Taliban forces kidnapped Malik Agha, head of the Zabol Province local council, charged him with spying for the US, and eventually killed him. Five of his friends were also kidnapped.
Two Qassam rockets were fired at the Netzer Hazani settlement. The attack was claimed by the military wing of Hamas. No injuries or damage were caused. The attack was one of several on Israeli settlements on this day and occurs amid increased tension in the region in the lead up to the Gaza pullout. The attack was retaliation for recent Israel Defense Force raids of Palestinians settlements, the arrest and killing of several Palestinian militants, and air strikes against Hamas militants that led to at least five militant deaths.
Two Qassam rockets were fired at the Atzmona settlement. The attack was claimed by the military wing of Hamas. No injuries or damage were caused. The attack was one of several on Israeli settlements on this day and occurs amid increased tension in the region in the lead up to the Gaza pullout. The attack was retaliation for recent Israel Defense Forces raids of Palestinians settlements, the arrest and killing of several Palestinian militants, and air strikes against Hamas militants that led to at least five militant deaths.
A mortar shell fired by Palestinians landed on a home in Qatif bloc. The home was damaged, but no injuries were caused. The attack was one of several on Israeli settlements on this day and occurs amid increased tension in the region in the lead up to the Gaza pullout.
Three Qassam rockets were fired at the Sederot settlement by Palestinian militants. No injuries or damages were reported.  The attack was one of several on Israeli settlements on this day and occurs amid increased tension in the region in the lead up to the Gaza pullout.
A suicide bomber attacked a police patrol in the Sadiya district in Baghdad. The attack was one of ten suicide bombings on this day, all claimed by  Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn, the group led by al-Zarqawi. Most of the attacks targeted Iraqi and US army units. This attack killed eleven people, including two police officers and wounded twenty-four others.
A Qassam rocket was fired at the Netzarim settlement. The attack did not cause any casualties or damage. The attack was claimed by the military wing of Hamas, in retaliation for recent Israel Defense Force (IDF) raids of Palestinian settlements, the arrest of many Palestinian militants, and the assassination of several Hamas members. The attack was one of several on this day and one of hundreds fired over the three day period from July 15 to July 17 in retaliation for IDF raids in Gaza. The attack comes amid a period of increased violence and tension in the region and in the lead up to the Gaza pullout.
One Qassam rocket was fired at the Kissufim settlement. The attack did not cause any casualties or damage. The attack was claimed by the military wing of Hamas, in retaliation for recent Israel Defense Forces (IDF) raids of Palestinian settlements, the arrest of many Palestinian militants, and the assassination of several Hamas members. The attack was one of several on this day and one of hundreds fired over the three day period from July 15 to July 17 in retaliation for IDF raids in Gaza. The attack comes amid a period of increased violence and tension in the region and in the lead up to the Gaza pullout.
On July 15, 2005, unknown assailants triggered a grenade explosion in Magam, Kashmir. The blast injured seven people, including a retired police officer and his two personal security officers.
Wongsa Pitakwong and Mana sae Phu, two teachers, were shot dead in Narathiwat's Sungai Padi district by two men on motorcycle.
Several mortar shells were fired at the police station in Musayyib, soon after a suicide bomber detonated his explosives near a fuel tanker outside a mosque in the city. No injuries were reported.
A suicide car bomber detonated his vehicle near a checkpoint jointly manned by Iraqi police and National Guard. The attack occurred at the entrance to Al-Iskandariyah. Three civilians and six police and army members were killed and twenty civilians were wounded in the attack.
Bomb sappers discovered and defused a remote-controlled explosive device, which was planted on a road in Nazimiye, in Tunceli province.  The device was made of five kilograms of C-4 plastic explosives and had the power to tear apart even an armored vehicle.  The intended target of the attack is unknown.
A battar rocket was fired at the Nahal Oz settlement. The attack did not cause any casualties or damage. The attack was claimed by the military wing of Hamas, in retaliation for recent Israel Defense Forces (IDF) raids of Palestinian settlements, the arrest of many Palestinian militants, and the assassination of several Hamas members. The attack was one of several on this day and one of hundreds fired over the three day period from July 15 to July 17 in retaliation for IDF raids in Gaza. The attack comes amid a period of increased violence and tension in the region and in the lead up to the Gaza pullout.
A Qassam rocket was fired at the Sederot settlement. The attack did not cause any casualties or damage. The attack was claimed by the military wing of Hamas, in retaliation for recent Israel Defense Forces (IDF) raids of Palestinian settlements, the arrest of many Palestinian militants, and the assassination of several Hamas members. The attack was one of several on this day and one of hundreds fired over the three day period from July 15 to July 17 in retaliation for IDF raids in Gaza. The attack comes amid a period of increased violence and tension in the region and in the lead up to the Gaza pullout.
Two Qassam rockets were fired at the Nahal Oz settlement. The attack did not cause any casualties or damage. The attack was claimed by the military wing of Hamas, in retaliation for recent Israel Defense Forces (IDF) raids of Palestinian settlements, the arrest of many Palestinian militants, and the assassination of several Hamas members. The attack was one of several on this day and one of hundreds fired over the three day period from July 15 to July 17 in retaliation for IDF raids in Gaza. The attack comes amid a period of increased violence and tension in the region and in the lead up to the Gaza pullout.
Two Qassam rockets were fired at the Sederot settlement. The attack did not cause any casualties or damage. The attack was claimed by the military wing of Hamas, in retaliation for recent Israel Defense Forces (IDF) raids of Palestinian settlements, the arrest of many Palestinian militants, and the assassination of several Hamas members. The attack was one of several on this day and one of hundreds fired over the three day period from July 15 to July 17 in retaliation for IDF raids in Gaza. The attack comes amid a period of increased violence and tension in the region and in the lead up to the Gaza pullout.
Several Qassam rockets were fired at the Nisanit settlement. Sixteen settlers were injured in the attack. The attack was claimed by the military wing of Hamas, in retaliation for recent Israel Defense Forces (IDF) raids of Palestinian settlements, the arrest of many Palestinian militants, and the assassination of several Hamas members. The attack was one of several on this day and one of hundreds fired over the three day period from July 15 to July 17 in retaliation for IDF raids in Gaza. The attack comes amid a period of increased violence and tension in the region and in the lead up to the Gaza pullout.
A suicide car bomber detonated his vehicle near the offices of Iraq's electoral commission in eastern Baghdad. The attack killed five election employees and one police officer. The attack wounded seven other people. The attack was claimed by the group loyal to al-Zarqawi, Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn.
Two Qassam rockets were fired at the Neve Deqalim settlement. The attack did not cause any casualties or damage. The attack was claimed by the military wing of Hamas, in retaliation for recent Israel Defense Forces (IDF) raids of Palestinian settlements, the arrest of many Palestinian militants, and the assassination of several Hamas members. The attack was one of several on this day and one of hundreds fired over the three day period from July 15 to July 17 in retaliation for IDF raids in Gaza. The attack comes amid a period of increased violence and tension in the region and in the lead up to the Gaza pullout.
Six qassam rockets were fired at the Dugit settlement. The attack did not cause any casualties or damage. The attack was claimed by the military wing of Hamas, in retaliation for recent Israel Defense Forces (IDF) raids of Palestinian settlements, the arrest of many Palestinian militants, and the assassination of several Hamas members. The attack was one of several on this day and one of hundreds fired over the three day period from July 15 to July 17 in retaliation for IDF raids in Gaza. The attack comes amid a period of increased violence and tension in the region and in the lead up to the Gaza pullout.
Several members of Hamass military wing opened fire on the cars of Israeli settlers in Kfar Darom. The attack injured many settlers, but no exact numbers were released. NOTE: Casualty numbers not given.
On July 17, 2005, Maulana Abdullah Ahmed Mahdi and his father came under fire from unknown gunmen in Karachi, Pakistan. Mahdi was killed while his father injured from the attack. Mahdi is a religious cleric and both him and his father are affiliated with the Jamia Madrassa Mehmoodia Trust.
Two Qassam rockets were fired at the Sederot settlement. The attack did not cause any casualties or damage. The attack was claimed by the military wing of Hamas, in retaliation for recent Israel Defense Forces (IDF) raids of Palestinian settlements, the arrest of many Palestinian militants, and the assassination of several Hamas members. The attack was one of several on this day and one of hundreds fired over the three day period from July 15 to July 17 in retaliation for IDF raids in Gaza. The attack comes amid a period of increased violence and tension in the region and in the lead up to the Gaza pullout.
A qassam rocket was fired at the Ganey Tal settlement. The attack did not cause any casualties or damage. The attack was claimed by the military wing of Hamas, in retaliation for recent Israel Defense Forces (IDF) raids of Palestinian settlements, the arrest of many Palestinian militants, and the assassination of several Hamas members. The attack was one of several on this day and one of hundreds fired over the three day period from July 15 to July 17 in retaliation for IDF raids in Gaza. The attack comes during a period of increased violence and tension in the region and in the lead up to the Gaza pullout.
Two police officers, Arbidin Manfa and Sawan Klangklam, and a villager, Kobsor Duerasor, were injured when a mobile phone-triggered bomb exploded under a unmarked police car.
Two police officers were killed when gunmen opened fire on their patrol in Baghdad.
A police officer was assassinated in Mosul when gunmen opened fire on him.  No further information is available.
Five mortar shells were fired at the Gadid settlement. One person was injured in the attack. The attack was one of several on this day in retaliation for Israel Defense Forces (IDF) raids in Gaza. The attack comes amid a period of increased violence and tension in the region and in the lead up to the Gaza pullout.
Insurgents damaged a fiber optics cable connecting Baghdad and southern Basra with an explosive device. The attack disrupted phone communications in southern Iraq. Utilities are the frequent target of insurgent attacks in Iraq.
On July 18, 2005, Syed Tahir Reza Rizvi was shot dead by unknown assailants in Quetta, Pakistan. Rizvi was the owner of a school. The attack occurred as Rizvi was exiting his house with his wife and three children. His wife, Narjis Fatima, was injured from the attack, but their children were not harmed.
A homemade bomb, controlled by mobile phone, exploded near a bridge in Narathiwat's Rangae district. The bomb exploded right after four soldiers protecting teachers went across the bridge on motorcycle.
The private residence of the Director General of the National Television of Haiti (TNH), Jacques Price  was shot at by unknown perpetrators.  There was damage to the house, but there were no injuries or fatalities.  With the national elections approaching, there has been increasing violence against journalists who are speaking out against  ex-President Jean-Bertrand Aristide (TNH included).  The government of Gerard Latortue (interim government in Haiti) has blamed gangs loyal to Aristide for the violence against the journalists.  A Haitian Journalist, Jacques Roche was killed the second week in July 2005.  The event perpetrated an emotional funeral and memories of the murder of Jean Dominique (another popular Haitian journalist) murdered  in April 2000.  The culture minister blamed gangs loyal to Aristide for Roche's murder.  The allegations of violence perpetrated by Aristide gangs on the media recently, and the coming of the national elections could suggest that the shooting at the house of Jacques Price was a political statement by Aristide supporters.Other sources: BBC,20, 21 July 2005, Financial Times Information, 22 July 2005, Intelligence Research 19,22 July 2005, Alterpresse, 20 July 2005,
Armed gunmen attacked a car carrying three high ranking Iraqi police officers in Baghdad. The attack wounded all three officers.
A Qassam rocket was fired at a settlement in the Qatif Bloc. It landed on a house, damaging the house and injuring a foreign worker. The attack comes amid a period of increased tension and violence in the region in the lead up to the Gaza pullout.
Two Iraqis who worked as contractors for US forces were killed. Their bodies were found on a highway north of Ramadi. Iraqis who cooperate with US forces are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
Two Qassam rockets were fired at the Kissufim settlement. No injuries were caused. The attack was claimed by the military wing of Hamas, in retaliation for recent Israel Defense Forces (IDF) raids and killings of several Hamas militants. The attack was one of several on this day and comes amid a period of increased violence and tension in the region, in response to IDF raids and targeted killings of militants and multiple barrages of mortar attacks on Israeli settlements. The attack also comes during preparations for the Gaza pullout.
Around July 19, 2005, Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) seized the homes and land of five civilians in the Nawalparasi district of Nepal.
Fifteen people, who the Taliban accuse of working with US forces, were killed in Kajran.  The Taliban entered the city and began to attack villagers.  Many fled the area, but some insisted on putting up a fight with firearms.  During the attack, Taliban members were distributing leaftlets in the name of the Islamic Emirate's Ministry of Defense, urging people to help them.
Insurgents detonated an explosive device under an oil pipeline near Samarra. The pipeline links the Bayji and Dora oil refineries and was damaged in the blast. Officials noted that the attack was likely to affect power supply for Baghdad's residents. This was one of two oil pipeline attacks on this day. Oil pipelines are a frequent target of insurgent attacks in Iraq.
Militants from Hamas attacked the home of the head of Fatah in Gaza, Abdallah Franji, in  Gaza City. This was one of two attacks on Palestinian officials' homes on this day. A total of seven people were injured in the two attacks combined. The attack comes amid increased violence in the region, following IDF raids of Gaza settlements, the arrest of many militants, and in the lead up to the Gaza pullout.
On July 20, 2005, members of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) attacked the home of a former Tamil Eelam Liberation Organization activist in the Vavuniya district of Sri Lanka. The grenade attack damaged the home but no casualties were reported.
An Afghan electoral worker educating voters on upcoming parliamentary elections was shot dead in the country's violence-plagued southeast, the UN-backed electoral commission said Monday.  Two or more unidentified attackers killed Hamid Mohammad Sarwar and shot his son in the leg as he tended to his father's body in Paktika province last Wednesday, said Joint Electoral Management Body spokeswoman Bronwyn Curran.  Sarwar was employed by the Tribal Liaison Office, an Afghan non-government organization (NGO), to help inform voters about scheduled September 18, 2005 parliamentary and provincial council elections.  Sarwar was shot dead in an attack by at least two men in the village of Mula Masood Ziarat in Yahya Kheil district of Paktika province on July 20, 2005 said Curran.  The Joint Electoral Management Body condemns the killing of civic educator Hamid Mohammad Sarwar in Paktika province last Wednesday.
Gunmen killed three members of the Iraqi Reconstruction Committee of Qadisiay province when they opened fire on them in Baghdad.
An explosive device detonated at an office building in the city of Guernica.  The blast occurred in the middle of the night and caused major damage to the premises, but no reported casualties.  This attack takes place one day after the death of a suspected Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) member who died while trying to outrun Spanish police.  ETA claimed responsibility for this blast on 20 September 2005.
On July 21, 2005, suspected members of the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) triggered an improvised explosive device, damaging a wooden bridge in the Tinsukia district of Assam, India. The explosion occurred as a police team arrived at the site to search for a bomb after receiving a tip from an anonymous call.
On July 21, 2005, a Reserve Police Constable was shot dead by members of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam while near the Bank of Ceylon Building in Ampara, Sri Lanka. A civilian was injured during the crossfire and later died as a result of his injuries.
Exactly two weeks after a deadly string of bombings on the London underground subway system, four other devices were planted in London.  Three of the four bombs were left on trains and the fourth was left on a public bus.  None of the devices managed to detonate and no carnage was caused.  All four bombs were planted by individuals who were not intended suicide bombers.  Three of the individuals entered the subway station at the Stockwell station and the fourth boarded at Westbourne Grove.  The fourth device was left on the Hammersmith & City line train, which was traveling westbound at the time.  The suspected bomber, Hussain Osman was seen in camera footage on the train around 12:21.  Hussain was born in Ethiopia, but was a naturalized British citizen.  He was arrested on 29 July in Rome, Italy, where he was tracked by his cell phone.  Britain was in negotiations with Italy to have him extradited back to London.  No charges had been filed as of mid-August 2005.  All four devices were made with homemade explosives and only managed to partially detonate.   All four suspects were eventually captured, but police have been unable to connect them to any known terrorist group.
Gunmen attacked a police patrol in the Baladiyat area of Baghdad, killing one police officer and wounding two others.
An employee at the Ministry of Interior was assassinated by gunmen in Baghdad.  The perpetrators were traveling in two cars when they opened fire upon the victim.
On July 22, 2005, Village Defense Committee Member Munshi Ram was shot dead by terrorists near his house in Rajouri, Kashmir.
Two people, including one Dutch tourist, were injured in an explosive attack in Istanbul.  The device detonated outside a restaurant under the Galata Bridge in the Golden Horn area of the city.  The device had been placed under a table at the restaurant.  Authorities are unsure if the attack was perpetrated by Kurdish separatists, left-wing organizations, or Islamic militants.
A Turkish engineer who worked at the power station in Bayji was kidnapped by gunmen on the road from Bayji to Kirkuk. The utility industries and their employees are the frequent target of insurgent attacks in Iraq.
A building housing a Justice of the Peace's office was attacked by unidentified perpetrators in Amorebieta.  The attackers damaged the front walls and smashed glass in the office.  The weapon used in the attack is unknown.  This was one of a number of attacks in the region on this evening.
A branch of the Banco Pastor bank was attacked with at least one Molotov cocktail, in Amorebieta.  Damage was caused to a cash dispenser and to the front walls of the premises.  This was one of four attacks on bank branches in the city on this evening.
An explosive device was thrown into a police barracks in Montesoro, a suburb of Bastia, on the island of Corsica.  Some damage was caused to the premises, but there were no reported injuries.  This attack comes a day after French Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy visited the island to discuss reforms.
Terrorists launched a coordinated attack in Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt.  The terrorist plot called for three simultaneous attacks on tourist infrastructure early Saturday morning (23 July 2005).  Two car bombs and one bomb in a suitcase exploded.  A total of eighty-eight people are thought to have died and another two hundred were wounded.  One car bomb exploded in the Old Market and the other in the lobby of the Ghazala Gardens Hotel.  The suitcase bomb exploded near a Moevenpick Hotel. Thus far three terrorists groups have claimed responsibility for the attack; however, none of these claims can be substantiated.The third bomb was placed either in a suitcase or sack and detonated in a beachfront parking lot two miles from the Moevenpick Hotel. The explosion killed at least six tourists.Update: Egyptian police have confirmed that a Sinai based terror group is responsible for the bombings. The bombings were in response to the jailing of their leader.  The group has no ties any foreign terrorist groups.
Gunmen assassinated the leader of the Samarra city council, Taha al-Hinderah, and a companion in Samarra. Gunmen opened fire on the two victims as they walked in Samarra.
Several mortars were fired at the Interior Ministry headquarters in Baghdad. One fell on the street, killing a police officer.
Two members of the protection force of Iraqi Industry Minister Usamah al-Najafi were assassinated by gunmen in Mosul.  No further information is avaiable.
A remote-controlled explosive device detonated under a train as it headed from Makhachkala to Khasavyurt, in Dagestan province.  The blast killed one woman and injured four other people when it detonated under the train's first car.  Authorities are unsure who may have carried out the attack, though this region has seen an increase in separatist violence over the past few years.
On July 24, 2005, an Afghan national set off a bomb near the Pakistan-Afghanistan border. At the Chaman border checkpoint, the bomb exploded while oil tankers were heading towards Afghanistan, having cleared customs. The suspected terrorist was killed and four civilians were injured by the explosion.
A suicide car bomber detonated his minivan at a checkpoint in front of the Sadir Hotel in Baghdad. The Sadir Hotel houses many contractors working with US forces and has been the target of previous attacks.  Zarqawi's group has referred to the hotel as 'the hotel of the Jew.' The attack killed twelve people and wounded at least eighteen others. Most killed in the attacks were believed to be security guards employed by the hotel.
A member of the council of religious scholars of Khost Province, Mawlawi Mohammad Daud Waqfi, was injured as a result of an explosion in the south of Khost city. Apparently, the scholar had been engaged in religious propaganda against the Taliban through a local radio station.  The device was planted on the front door of the home and when he opened the door early in the morning, the bomb exploded. As a result, Mawlawi Waqfi was injured.
Gunmen ambushed two buses carrying Iraqi employees home from the al-Faris factory, an Industry Ministry facility, in western Baghdad. The factory and its workers are involved in several US-backed reconstruction projects. Gunmen in two cars opened fire on the buses, killing sixteen people and wounding twenty-seven others. Iraqis who work with US forces are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
Gunmen attacked a police patrol in Basra. The attack killed one policeman and one civilian.  No further information is provided.
A Qassam rocket was fired at the Sederot settlement. The rocket damaged several cars and a house patio, but did not injure any people. The attack was claimed by the military wing of Islamic Jihad. The attack comes amid increased tension in the region in the lead up to the Gaza pullout.
On July 26, 2005, suspected Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists threw bombs at a public gathering in Doti, Nepal. At least sixteen civilians were injured from the blast. Reportedly, the civilians captured four of the Maoists after the attack and gave them to the security forces.
Ekkasak Visetsuwannaphum, the son of a policeman, was beheaded.
Weapons, most likely from a disposable grenade launcher, were fired on an electric power substation in the Mogilyovskoye village of Dagestan by unknown assailants.  There were no casualties and one of the machines at the station was damaged.
A suicide car bomber detonated his vehicle at a police checkpoint operated by police commandos in southwestern Baghdad. The attack killed one commando and wounded four others.
Palestinian militants fired three Qassam rockets at the Sederot settlement. No injuries were caused in this attack. The attack comes amid a period of increased tension in the region the lead up to the Gaza pullout.
On July 27, 2005, five school teachers, along with the driver of the auto-rickshaw in which they were traveling, were kidnapped by the All Tripura Tiger Force in the West Tripura district of India. One of the teachers and the driver have been released.
Explosive devices were placed by Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) on an electricity pylon.  The Colombian military (Heroes de Pisba Counterinsurgency Battalion) was able  to remove and defuse the device before it exploded.  There were no injuries or fatalities.
Insurgents detonated an explosive device near an oil pipeline that runs from Kirkuk to an oil refinery in Bayji. The attack caused damage to the pipeline, which was already out of commission due to damage from a previous attack. Oil pipelines in Iraq are the target of frequent insurgent attacks.
A police officer was killed and four were wounded when a roadside bomb exploded in front of a police station in southern Baghdad.
Vichian Prathianthong, an employee of the job creation scheme of the Southern Border Provinces Peace-building Command, and his wife were shot in Narathiwat's Sungai Padi district.
On July 28, 2005, in Jaffna, Sri Lanka, Sooriyapillai Nixon, an Eelam People's Democratic Party activist, was shot dead by the pistol gang of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam.
Armed gunmen, suspected members of the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK), opened fire on a military recruitment office in the Gumushane province, killing one guard.  The PKK has only recently become active in this province, authorities believe the group has come north from the mainly Kurdish southeast and are trying to establish themselves in the region.  A similar attack occurred in the same area this week, targeting a police vehicle in central Gumushane.
Brigadier General Adil Mulan, the chief of police in Diyala Governorate, was the target of an attempt on his life when an explosive charge was detonated near his convoy in Buhruz. The attack injured a police colonel and another policeman who were part of the convoy.
A homemade bomb was found before detonation in Yala.  The bomb, weighing 5 kilograms, was under a bench in front of the Bannang Sata branch of the Krungthai Bank.  It was spotted by a local who informed police who defused and destroyed the bomb.
On July 29, 2005, Kuki Liberation Army (KLA) members threw grenades at the residence of the Additional Chief Engineer of the Irrigation and Flood Control Department in Imphal, Manipur and at a transport agency office in the Thangmeibandh area of Manipur, India. Neither of the grenades exploded and no one was injured by the attack. The KLA secretary claimed that the attack was a result of the government not responding to KLA's demands.
Unknown perpetrators attacked a bank in Durango, Vizcaya province, with Molotov cocktails.  There were no damages caused by the attack.  This was one of two such incidents in the city on this evening.
Armed gunmen attacked the al-Maqddad police station in Kirkuk, injuring two policemen. One gunmen was killed in the ensuing gun battle.
Mahamasukree Kadeh, a government informant, was shot while riding his motorcycle in Narathiwat's Bacho district. He sustained a serious injury to his hip.
A homemade bomb planted outside a Serb household in Kosovo was defused by Kosovo Protection Corps.
Gunmen opened fire on a truck carrying employees of the Health Administration in Kirkuk. The attack killed one person and wounded two others.
Four missiles were fired at the Netzarim settlement, and no injuries were reported. The attack was claimed by a military wing of Fatah. The attack comes amid increased violence in the region in the lead-up to the Gaza pullout.
Three activists of the Parbatya Chattagram Jana Sanghati Samity (PCJSS) were shot dead by the United Peoples Democratic Front (UPDF) in the Logang Amtali area of Khagrachhari district. The slain PCJSS cadres were later identified as Gajendralal Chakma, Shadhan Bikash Chakma and Ranjan Kumar Chakma.
Three people, including a foreign national, have been wounded in a Taliban attack in the Sangin District in the southwest Helmand Province.   The victims were driving in a car when unidentified perpetrators opened fire on them. The victims included two Afghan guards and one foreign employee of the agency.   So far no one has been arrested in connection with the incident.
Gunmen opened fire on a senior official in the Interior Ministry and head of the ministry of commandos, Brigadier General Abdelsalam Rauf Saleh, killing him and wounding two bodyguards. The attack occurred in Baghdad. The attack was claimed by the group loyal to Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn.
Three Iraqi police officers were kidnapped from their homes by men wearing Iraqi army uniforms. Their bodies were found several days later in  Baghdad. Note: Kidnapping date is approximate.
Two police officers were killed and six were wounded when insurgents set off a bomb explosion in Nurestan province.  A gunfight errupted between police and the insurgents and one assailant was killed.  Authorities believe that this attack was most likely perpetrated in order to disrupt the 18 September election.
A bomb planted in a fire extinguisher at a teachers' housing unit in Narathiwat exploded on a timer; no one was injured.
Gunmen killed the Chief of the Abu Ghraib police department, Col. Mizhir Hamad Yusuf, when they opened fire on him in front of his home in Baghdad as he was going to work. One other police officer traveling with him was also killed.
Gunmen killed a police officer in Baghdad when they opened fire on his car in Baghdad as he was returning home from work.
An explosive device detonated outside the home of a former Palestinian Justice Minister, Zuhair Sourani, in Gaza City. No injuries were caused. Sourani had recently been appointed by parliament to investigate corruption in the Palestinian Authority. He was one of two such appointees to be attacked in the span of two days. The attack comes amid increased violence in the region in the lead up the Gaza pullout. The attack came shortly before a large missile strike by Palestinian militants that inadvertently killed a Palestinian boy and wounded several other Palestinians.
A Security Force (SF) member was killed and five of his colleagues sustained injuries in an ambush by the United Liberation Front of Asom (ULFA) at Sadiya in the Tinsukia district. The SFs were on routine patrol duty when they came under fire from the perpetrators hiding inside the Halowagaon Reserve forest.
A child, Lokendra, was killed and another sustained injuries in a bomb explosion, triggered by the insurgents, at Tudidhara in the Manakot Village Development Committee (VDC) area of Bajura district.
A homemade bomb exploded in front of a health care center in the Muang district.  No further information is available.
Gunmen killed a police officer in Baghdad when they opened fire on him as he was leaving for work.
Gunmen attacked a police checkpoint in northern Baqubah, killing at least one police officer.
On August 3, 2005 Naxalites reportedly shot dead a former colleague, identified as Hiralal, at the Khodela jungle of Sonebhadra district in Uttar Pradesh, after branding him as a police informer.
A civilian was abducted by the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) from Panauti municipality in Kavrepalanchowk district on August 3, 2005.
A car bomb exploded near a group of police commandos from the Wolf Brigade who were traveling with a delegation from the Mahdi Army of Shi'a Cleric Muqtada al-Sadr. The group had stopped at a Shi'a shrine near Kirkuk when the blast occurred. The blast killed two members of the Wolf Brigade and two Shiite clerics from al-Sadrs group who were also traveling with the convoy. Four other members of the group, including police commandos and members of the Mahdi Army were injured in the attack.
A terrorist attack was interrupted when Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) found three Palestinian militants preparing to launch mortar shells and rockets in Israeli settlements in Gaza Strip. IDF troops opened fire on the militants, killing all three.
Insurgents detonated several explosive devices under an oil pipeline in Kirkuk. The explosion caused damage to the pipeline and a large fire on the pipeline. Oil pipelines and the oil industry are frequent target of insurgent attacks in Iraq.
The Jaffna district Superintendent of Police, W. D. Charles Wijewardene, was abducted and hacked to death by a mob allegedly instigated by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) at Jaffna-KKS road in the Paalaveddi area. Wijewardene was reportedly attempting to defuse tension which had erupted after a civilian, identified as J. Shantharooban, was killed in an accidental gunfire at Innuvil junction by a soldier. Wijewardenes body was later found lying at Palavodai, between Innuvil and Suthumalai, 2-km west from the incident site.
A police vehicle was blown-up using a remote-controlled explosive device in Oruzgan Province yesterday. Two policemen were killed and two were wounded in the explosion.  Confirming this report, Oruzgan Province Governor Jan Mohammad Khan told Afghan Islamic Press this morning: Yesterday, a police convoy was traveling from the Charchino area to the provincial capital, Tarin Kot. One vehicle in the convoy was blown up using a remote-controlled explosive device in the Kishi area. He added: Two policemen were killed and two were wounded in the incident.  A Taliban spokesman, Mofti Latifollah Hakimi, admitted responsibility for this incident and told Afghan Islamic Press: Our mojahedin attacked a security forces' convoy in Oruzgan Province as a result of which four policemen, not two, were killed.
Gunmenkilled Salman Ahmad, a leader of the Badr Corps, in Baqubah when they opened fire on him and his son. Ahmad's son was injured in the attack.
A pipeline carrying gas was blown-up at an unspecified place near Duliajan in the Dibrugarh district disrupting supply to the North Eastern Electric Power Corporation plant at Kothalguri.
Gunmen assassinated a British advisor who worked for the RTI Company when they opened fire on him and his interpreter in Basra. The  female interpreter, Nur-al-Khal, was also killed in the attack.
Two kilograms of TNT exploded near an electricity pylon on Grozny's Ulitsa Bogdana Khmelnitskogo.  There were no casualties.
The Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) attempted to assassinate Jayantha Wijesekera, the Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna parliamentarian for Kantale in Trincomalee District. Two LTTE members, riding on motorcycles, reportedly hurled a hand grenade towards his office, while he was addressing a public gathering, injuring Sergeant Nawarathne. The police managed to arrest one of the LTTE cadres with a 9 mm pistol and cyanide capsule.
Ismael Masuni, an assistant village chief, was wounded in an attack in Yala's Bannang Sata district.
Palestinian gunmen opened fire on an Israeli vehicle in Ramallah, seriously wounding a young Israeli boy and injuring the driver of the car. The attack was claimed by the military wing of Fatah. The attack comes amid increased violence in the region in the lead up to the Gaza pullout.
Gunmen in two cars opened fire on a  policeman in Basra, killing him.
The police commander of the city of Al-Mashahidah was killed by gunmen who opened fire on him.
On August 7, 2005 suspected United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) terrorists triggered two improvised explosive device (IED) explosions in the Pulibor area of Jorhat district partially damaging two transformers. Power supply to about 500 consumers has been affected as a result of the explosion.
Armed Palestinian militants kidnapped two UN workers, a British woman and a Swiss man, and their Palestinian driver, from a UN vehicle in Khan Yunis, in southern Gaza Strip. The two foreigners were identified as workers of the UN agency for Palestinian refugees (UNRWA) in Gaza City. After several hours of captivity, the three were freed by Palestinian security forces during a raid in Khan Yunis. Security forces reported that the abduction was perpetrated by a group loyal to Faruq Qaddumi, the head of the Fatah party and a rival of Palestinian leader Abbas. The attack was likely linked to the recent arrest of an ally of Faruq Qaddumi, Suleiman Al-Farra, who was arrested after announcing that Qaddumi had ordered the formation of a popular army to help with Palestinian security in Gaza during the pullout.  The International Committee of the Red Cross announced that it was suspending its operations in Gaza in response to the recent kidnappings of foreigners in the region.
A Turkish truck driver carrying supplies for US forces was killed when gunmen attacked his convoy. Those who cooperate and work with US forces are the frequent target of insurgent attacks in Iraq.
A petrol bomb was thrown at the home of Dessie Ward, a Sinn Fein councilor in Banbridge, in County Down.  The device was thrown at Ward's house and caused minor scorch damage, but no injuries.  Ward was elected to the district council this year.
On August 8, 2005 the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) bombed a gas pipeline at Gabharupathar village in the Sibsagar district causing minor damage to the pipeline.
The Taliban say they have killed another election candidate in Ghazni Province.  The Taliban spokesman, Mofti Latifollah Hakimi, telephoned the Afghan Islamic Press office in Peshawar from an undisclosed location and said: The Taliban killed Mohammad Hashem, a parliamentary election candidate in Andar District of Ghazni Province, last night (8 August 2005).  Hakimi added Mohammad Hashem was a member of the communist Khalq party [a faction of the former People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan]. He did not give any further details.  Official sources have so far not commented on the report.  Prior to this, the Taliban have killed a number of parliamentary candidates in Ghazni and other provinces.  Andar District lies 40 kilometers to the south of Ghazni Province.
Gunmen killed police Capt. Haidir Mizhir Salih and another police officer who was traveling with him as they were driving to work in Baghdad. The attack was one of several on police forces in Baghdad on this day. Three of the attacks, including this one, was claimed by the group loyal to Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn.
Gunmen opened fire on a minibus carrying Shi'a pilgrims to Iran, killing three and wounding eight. The attack took place on a road used heavily by pilgrims, east of Baqubah.
Gunmen assassinated an employee of the Iraqi cabinet, Abbas Ibrahim Mohammed, when they opened fire on him in Baghdad. Government employees are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
Cadres of the Communist Party of India-Maoist (CPI-Maoist) killed two persons related to Chhattisgarh's Leader of Opposition in the State Legislative Assembly, Mahendra Karma, on August 9, 2005 in the Dantewara district. According to Home Minister Ram Vichar Netam, the Maoists attacked Karma's native Pharaspal village and killed two of his relatives identified as his brother, Suku Karma, and a distant relative, Sukhdev. Karma is reported to be actively involved in the ongoing movement against the Maoists by tribals in the Dantewara district.
According to Daily Times, police foiled an assassination attempt on the North West Frontier Province (NWFP) Chief Minister Akram Durrani and arrested a suspect. The incident occurred on Charsadda Road where Durrani was on an inspection on August 9, 2005. Police arrested the man and recovered a pistol and some bullets from his possession.
A suicide car bomber detonated his vehicle near an Iraqi police patrol in the Ghazaliya district of Baghdad. The attack killed six people, including two police, and wounded 16 others, including two policemen.
A US citizen was briefly kidnapped and released in Iraq. No further details were available.
United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) cadres lobbed a grenade at the Sonari police station in Sivasagar district on August 10, 2005 injuring two police personnel, Deepak Tunkhungia and Jeevandeep Mili.
On August 10, 2005 the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) cadres shot dead a civilian, identified as Suresh Limbu, under Pengeri police station in the Tinsukia district.
A bomb exploded on the second floor of St. Anne's Pension House on Mayor Climaco Ave.  The blast injured at about twenty people, some of whom were eating at the restaurant below.  This blast occurred an hour later than the bus bombing and just two blocks away from it. At the same time, police disarmed a third bomb planted at a restaurant.
The Municipal Secretary, Froylan Ruiz Alvarez, and The Municipal Treasurer, Juan Alegre Romero, were shot by unknown perpetrators with AK47s and .9mms while driving along the Mil Cumbres-Tzizio highway.  The motive of robbery is unlikely since law enforcement found 21,000 pesos in the car at the crime scene.
Gunmen attacked a truck convoy carrying supplies for US forces in Baqubah. The attack did not cause any damage or injuries to the convoy, but two civilians were killed and one wounded in the attack. Those cooperating with US forces are the frequent target of insurgent attacks in Iraq.
A homemade explosive device, made of two cylinders of gas and an alarm clock, was found and defused in front of a tourist information center in Bayonne, in southwest France.  An anonymous caller, representing an illegal terrorist organization, called to warn of the device.
The son of the director of an Oil Ministry gas filling station was kidnapped by unknown gunmen in Kirkuk. The oil industry and its employees, along with government employees, are the frequent target of insurgent attacks in Iraq.
Cadres of the Communist Party of India-Maoists (CPI-Maoist) blew-up a railway track near Kumandih railway station in the Latehar district, while enforcing the twenty-four-hour Palamau division shutdown called by them to protest against the State Government's proposal to set-up seventy-one new police stations and launching a field firing range at Netarhat. Train movement between Garwah Road and Barkakana station was affected due to the blast, even as security forces stationed near the area clashed with the Maoists. However, there were no reports of any casualty in the clash.Note: Incident date is approximate.
Due to threats from the Maoist-affiliated All Nepal National Independent Students UnionRevolutionary, all private and Government schools in the Udaypur district have remained closed since August 11, 2005 affecting over five thousand students.
Kasem Hayueseng, a village security team member, was shot and killed in the Yala district after his vehicle was stopped by metal spikes placed in the Patae-Bannang Sata road.  Attackers used a shotgun, a 9mm pistol, and M-16 and AK-47 rifles.  Police believe the act may have been an attempt by insurgents to deter Muslims from working for the army-led Southern Border Provinces Peace-Building Command.
A car bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad. The attack injured two police officers and two civilians.
An Iraqi police patrol in Kirkuk was attacked when insurgents detonated an explosive device near the patrol. One officer and one civilian, a taxi driver,  were killed in the attack.
On August 12, 2005 'pistol gang' cadres of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) reportedly killed two civilians, identified as Sinnadorai Selvarajah and his wife Welangee Selvarajah, inside their business centre at Wellawatta. While Sinnadorai was reportedly a strong supporter of the Peoples Liberation Organization of Tamil Eelam, his wife Welangee was an ex-announcer at the Sri Lanka Broadcasting Cooperation and Sri Lanka Rupavahini Cooperation.
Cadres of the Communist Party of India-Maoists (CPI-Maoist) reportedly blasted two buildings of the Forest Department at Lothugedda in the Visakhapatnam district of Andhra Pradesh on evening of August 12, 2005. They also put up banners near the buildings seeking support for their shutdown programme on August 15, 2005  in the east division opposing bauxite mining by the Jindal Company and against alleged official apathy in controlling deaths of tribals due to viral fever. They also left a note warning seven tribal home guards.
Four people, including two women, were wounded in a blast which rocked the main southern Afghan city of Kandahar on Friday, an official and witnesses said.  The bomb went-off around noon in a crowded women's market in the city's Charso district, injuring four passers-by while they were shopping, the city's police chief Abdul Malik told AFP.  The police chief said the bomb was placed in a pressure cooker at the market. It was the work of terrorists who want to create fear among people, he added.  He did not blame the attack on any particular group, but similar incidents in the past have been blamed on remnants of the Taliban, who have stepped up attacks on government and the US-led targets in recent weeks.
Gunmen killed several individuals who work with US forces in Baghdad. The bodies of an interpreter who works with US troops and three other contractors were found in Baghdad. Two civilians were also killed in the attack. Those who work with US forces are the frequent target of insurgent attacks in Iraq.
A village guard, Mehyettin Sengul, was shot and killed by suspected members of the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) in the village of Koguktas in eastern Turkey.  No further information is available.
A high ranking physician in Iraq, Dr. Adil Shamkhi al-Hafnawi, was kidnapped by unknown assailants. Hafnawi was the head of the Health Department of Karbala under Saddam Hussein. About a week after the kidnapping, on August 20, 2005 al-Hafnawi's body was found dead in Baghdad. Doctors are becoming an increasingly frequent target of insurgent attacks in Iraq.
In Visakhapatnam district Communist Party of India-Maoists killed a tribal leader, K. Bangaru Dora, at Cherupuru village on August 13, alleging that he was motivating villagers against Maoists.
A suicide bomber tried to detonate his explosive belt near a refreshment shop in the Al-Mahwil city market, in Baghdad, when police saw him and pursued him. Officers shot at the bomber, but the bomber was able to detonate his explosives anyway. One person was killed and four others injured in the attack.
An explosive device detonated at a government building in the Beytussebap town in Sirnak province.  The blast caused major damages to the building, but there were no reported injuries.  No further information is available.
Taliban militants have kidnapped a Lebanese engineer working on a US-funded road project in southern Afghanistan, officials and the Taliban said Monday.A Lebanese man, Ahmed Reza, working for a Turkish construction company was kidnapped near Qalat, Zabul, Gulab Shah Alikhil, provincial spokesman for the Zabul governor told AFP.Three Afghans were also taken hostage on the Kabul-Kandahar road on Sunday evening along with Reza but were later released, he added.Taliban spokesman Abdul Latif Hakimi confirmed the kidnapping saying, We captured Ahmad Reza. He's fine, but we haven't decided yet on his fate.Update, August 18 (FBIS Report):The Taliban have handed over the Lebanese engineer to Afghan security forces in Shahjoy District.  Speaking to Afghan Islamic Press a short while ago, Mofti Latifollah Hakimi, the Taliban spokesman, said: The Taliban have handed over Safiy al-Din Muhammad Rida, the Lebanese engineer, to the Afghan security forces in Shahjoy District, Zabol Province [in southern Afghanistan].  Hakimi added: We hope the Lebanese company will fulfill its pledge to leave Afghanistan.
In Amparai, two police personnel were injured when unidentified persons threw grenades targeting a police post at Pandiruppu.
Palestinian militants opened fire at remaining settlers in the Kfar Darom settlement. No damages or injuries were caused. The attack comes as Israel begins the Gaza pullout and amid increased tension in the region.
A worker for a government food program was killed by unknown gunmen in Baqubah. Those who cooperate with the new Iraqi government are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
A roadside bomb hidden in a cow carcass exploded near a convoy of trucks carrying supplies for U.S. forces in northern Iraq. The attack occurred in Dujail and resulted in the death of one Turkish truck driver. Those who work with U.S. forces are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
A sound bomb detonated at an ATM in the town of Omerli, in Mardin province, injuring four people that were waiting to use the machine.  Authorities suspect that the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) is responsible, as they have increased attacks recently in correlation with the twenty-first anniversary since their founding.
A small bomb exploded under an Multinational Force and Observers' (MFO) vehicle near the MFO camp, which is 35 km away from El Arish.  Two Canadian soldiers were injured in the initial blast. A second unexploded device was also found at the scene.  A group calling itself the Mujahidu Misr or Strugglers of Egypt claimed responsibility. This group is one of the three groups which claimed responsibility for the Sharm al-Shaykh bombings on  23 July 2005.  The Egyptian authorities have only said that a group based in the northern Sinai is responsible.
An explosion occurred in Iqbal Park, adjacent to Bakshi Stadium where an Independence Day function was to take place with Chief Minister Mufti Mohammad Sayeed.  The Al Mansooran and Hizb-ul-Mujahideen are reported to have separately claimed responsibility for the blast.
Gunmen opened fire on a civilian defense center in Baghdad, killing two Iraqi policemen and injuring four others.
A Russian man who was formerly imprisoned in Guantanamo was kidnapped from his home by unknown persons wearing balaclavas and camouflage clothing.
Jhon Fredy Pulgarin Paniagua, a reinserted fighter of Cacique Nutibara Bloc (BCN), who laid down his arms 25 November 2003, was killed by unknown assailants.  The tactic and weapon are unknown.
Israeli settlers tried to burn down an Arab house in the settlement of Kfar Darom. Palestinians responded by throwing rocks at the settlers to stop them. Israeli Defense Forces eventually arrived, put out the fire, and removed the settlers. No injuries were caused in the attack. The incident comes amid the Gaza pullout, only days before soldiers are expected to begin forcibly removing settlers from the Kfar Darom settlement.
Gunmen in Baiji attacked a convoy of trucks carrying supplies for US forces in Northern Iraq. Three truck drivers were killed in the attack, including one Turk. Those who cooperate with US forces are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
A roadside bomb was detonated near the vehicle carrying three members of the Supreme Council for Islamic Revolution in Iraq (SCIRI), a leading Shiite group in Iraq. The attack occurred in Baghdad. One SCIRI member was killed and the other two wounded in the attack.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol trying to defuse the bomb in Baghdad. The explosion killed two people, including one police officer and one civilian, and wounded eight others, including two policemen.
A series of bombs exploded nearly simultaneously in dozens of cities across Bangladesh, striking regional capitals as well as the national capital, Dhaka.  According to police, at least 115 people were injured with some 350 bombs exploding.  Bangladeshi media reported at least one fatality.  Jamayetul Mujahedin claimed responsibility for the attacks in leaflets distributed around the blast sites.  Most of the bombs exploded in quick succession in and around government facilities.  In Dhaka, bombs exploded near the high-security Bangladesh Secretariat, the Supreme Court Complex, the Prime Minister's Office, the Dhaka University Campus, the Dhaka Sheraton Hotel, and Zia International Airport.  At least three people were injured in the Dhaka blasts.
An Iraqi judge, Jasim Wahab Dowaych, was assassinated by gunmen who opened fire on his car as he was being driven to work at the Court of Appeals in Baghdad. Dowaychs driver was also killed in the attack. Government employees are the frequent target of insurgent attacks in Iraq.
Armed men in Interior Ministry Uniforms kidnapped 22 men from the Iskan neighborhood in Baghdad. The mens bodies were found about one month later, on September 27, 2005, near the town of Kut. The men had been shot and their hands bound by ropes and handcuffs.
Gunmen in Mosul kidnapped three members of the Iraqi Islamic Party, the largest Sunni group in Iraq. The kidnappers brought the three men to the Dhi al-Nourein Mosque in a different neighborhood in Mosul, blocked all traffic on the road in front of the mosque, forced the men to stand against a wall, and opened gunfire on them. The kidnappers left the bodies and fled the scene. Attacks on those who cooperate with and participate in the government are frequent in Iraq.The following day, three men in the car reportedly used in the kidnapping opened fire on a US-Iraqi military patrol. US forces returned fire, killing all three men. It was not known if these were the same men who perpetrated the killings the day before.
Insurgents attacked a major electricity feeder line between Bayji and Baghdad with an explosive device, causing severe damage to the line and forcing the shutdown of power plants throughout the nation and disrupting oil exports. The oil and power industries are the frequent target of insurgent attacks in Iraq.
A petrol tanker was damaged and one person was injured as a result of an explosion on the Torkham-Jalalabad road this afternoon.  The governor of Kot District in Nangarhar Province, Haji Sayed Rahman, told Afghan Islamic Press: A bomb had been placed on a bicycle on the Torkham-Jalalabad road, near the Ghazi Abad farm. This bomb exploded as an oil tanker was passing by.  Haji Sayed Rahman added: As a result of the explosion, which took place this afternoon, the oil tanker was damaged and the tanker driver's assistant was slightly injured. There was no further damage.  The Taliban telephoned journalists in Jalalabad [the capital of Nangarhar Province] this evening and claimed responsibility for the explosion, saying that one person had been killed. But the governor of Kot District said that only one person was slightly injured.
Two explosive devices in black bags were found by a street vendor and destroyed by police at the boundary fence of a school in Yala's Muang district.
Terrorists opened fire on the house of ruling People's Democratic Party (PDP) block president Ghulam Hassan Rather at village Sheeri in Baramulla district.  No casualties were reported.
Insurgents threw two grenades into a crowded market in Fallujah, injuring twenty civilians.
Gunmen killed the supervisor of the Al-Sadr city branch of the National Front for Iraq's Unity Party, in Baghdad. The victim was identified as Muhammad Zamil.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) attacked a factory in the Cesar Department.  10 FARC members cleared the factory of its workers and placed bombs inside.  Two generators were destroyed and  the facilities damaged.  There were no injuries or fatalities reported.  The factory produced alcohol.
On August 20, suspected Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) cadres shot dead an Eelam People's Democratic Party (EPDP) member, identified as Nadaraja Kesavavarnan, in the Vavuniya district.
A car bomb exploded near a restaurant in the al-Kazimiyah neighborhood of Baghdad, killing four Iraqi civilians and wounding nine others. The attack also caused damage to nearby shops. Security forces later arrested three persons suspected of involvement in the attacks.
A top physician in Baiji, Mohammad Nayef, working at the public hospital was kidnapped by unknown armed men as he walked out of his house to work. Doctors are becoming an increasingly frequent target of insurgent attacks in Iraq.
A small bomb detonated near two cork collectors in the Mechat region of El Milia.  The morning explosion injured the two workers. The Salafist Group for Call and Combat (GSPC) is believed to be responsible.
On Sunday August 21 two US embassy staffers were wounded as their vehicle hit an improvised roadside bomb in Paghman District, west of this central capital. A US embassy spokesman said that the two staffers suffered only minor injuries.  Meanwhile, a senior official of the Agriculture Ministry said that the vehicle was completely destroyed in the explosion.  The upcoming parliamentary election is believed to be the main reason behind the stepped up insurgency as the ousted militia is threatening the candidates and issuing warnings to disrupt the polls.
A bomb on the highway between Nazran and Magas in Russia, was defused before it could explode by police who acted upon a tip.  The bomb was planted in a gas station and contained the equivalent of several hundred grams of TNT.
Police found and defused a bomb near the Kfar Darom settlement. The attempted attack comes during the Gaza pullout, as Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) remove settlers from the Gaza settlements.
An explosive device detonated near a police patrol in Kirkuk, wounding four police officers. Security forces in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
An explosive device detonated against the personal car of the director of general affairs for the Haute-Corse department, on the island of Corsica.  The vehicle was destroyed by the blast, and another car, belonging to the director's wife, was also severely damaged.  The blast, which took place in San Martino di Lota, outside Bastia, did not cause any injuries.  No group has claimed responsibility for this attack.
A group of terrorists abducted and subsequently shot dead a taxi driver, Maroof Ahmad Rather, at Litter village in the Pulwama district. His vehicle was also set ablaze by the terrorists.
An unidentified man blew  himself up in Spin Boldak District of southern Kandahar Province as police tried to chase and arrest him, officials said.  The man entered the border district from Pakistan in a car laden with explosives.  Police pursued the vehicle on suspicion but the man blew himself before up being caught.
The Iraqi Minister of the Environment, Narmine Othman, who is a Kurd and member of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan party, was the target of an assassination attempt when gunmen attacked her convoy in Oudaim, between Kirkuk and Baqubah. Othman was not injured in the attack, but three of her bodyguards were injured and one car was damaged. Government employees are the frequent target of insurgent attacks in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on the convoy of Iraqi Deputy Justice Ministe, Awshoo Ibrahim, in Baghdad. Ibrahim was not traveling in the convoy at that time and so was not injured in the attack. Three of his bodyguards were injured however. This was the one of two attempts on Ibrahim's life in two days. Employees of the Iraqi government are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
Cadres of the Communist Party of India-Maoist (CPI-Maoist) killed a Telugu Desam Party member, Guttapalli Satyanarayana, at Adigoppula in the Guntur district on August 23 for allegedly not obeying their 'dictat'.
Four petrol bombs were thrown into a home belonging to an elderly couple, in north Belfast.  The homeowner was taken to the hospital and treated for shock after his house was targeted.  This was one of multiple attacks in the area on this evening.
Insurgents attacked two police checkpoints and a police patrol with suicide bombs and gunfire in Baghdad, killing a total of fifteen people and wounding up to fifty-nine.The first attack occurred when a suicide bomber detonated his vehicle near a police patrol traveling in western Baghdad near several police checkpoints. The attack killed several members of the police patrol and wounded other police officers and bystanders. Specific casualty numbers for this attack were not given. NOTE: Casualty numbers are for the entire coordinated attack.
A suicide bomber detonated his vehicle near the convoy of the Iraq Defense Minister. The Minister survived the attack, but several bystanders were wounded and killed. No specific casualty numbers were released. Government employees are the frequent target of attack in Iraq.
Gunmen stormed the home of a police commando in Baghdad, forced the commando and his relatives into a room, planted several bombs around the house, and then detonated the explosives, killing the commando and six other people.
A Palestinian attacked and stabbed  two Orthodox British Jews in an Arab market neat the Jaffe Gate in Jerusalem. The victims were identified as Shmuel Mett, who was killed in the incident, and Sam Weissbart, who was injured in the attack. Both are rabbinical students at Jerusalem's Mir Yeshiva religious college.
Cadres of the Communist Party of India-Maoists (CPI-Maoist) attacked a Congress leader's house at Gompelli village under Charla police station limits in the Khammam district on August 24. The house was partially damaged as the Maoists attempted to blast it using explosives. A vehicle parked outside the house was blown up in the blast.
Palestinian militants shot two rockets into the Sederot settlement in Gaza, but the rockets landed in an empty field and caused no damage.The attack was claimed by the military wing of the Popular Resistance Committees and was in retaliation for a raid conducted by IDF forces in which five Islamic Jihad members were killed.
A learning center and five telephone booths were torched.
On an evening of sectarian violence, a number of homes on the Alliance Avenue area of north Belfast were targeted by petrol bombers.  At least four petrol bombs were thrown during the attack, some at the home of an elderly couple.  One man was taken to the hospital and treated for shock.  Police also discovered a number of unexploded devices around the homes.
Suspected Taliban insurgents have shot dead a government mapmaker and a merchant as the two walked through a city in southern Afghanistan, police said Friday.  The gunmen, riding motorcycles, attacked the men on Thursday as they were walking home in Lashkar Gah, the capital of Helmand province.  A purported spokesman for the ousted Taliban regime, Abdul Latif Hakimi, claimed responsibility for the attack in a telephone call from an undisclosed location.  He claimed the mapmaker, named as Amanullah, was the acting governor of the province, but the police director said the victim was just a cartographer, nothing else.
The Director of Muqtada al-Sadr's office in Karbala was the target of an assassination attempt when gunmen attacked him and an escort in Karbala. The escort was killed, but the director of the office survived the attack. The attack comes amid a surge in violence between supporters of al-Sadr and opponents of the cleric, particularly members of the Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution (SCIRI). The violence has led to clashes and deaths across Iraq and to multiple attacks on headquarters of both al-Sadr and SCIRI.
Thirty-six Sunni men were kidnapped from Baghdad by men in police uniforms.Sseveral days later,  their bodies were found shot to death in a river bed south of Baghdad. Members of the largest Sunni party in the country, the Iraqi Islamic Party, claimed that the attack had been perpetrated by members of the Shiite-led security forces, in the most recent example of deadly sectarian violence.
Military bomb experts defused a bomb planted in the government Land Transportation Office in Cotabato City.
An Iraqi police lieutenant colonel was killed in Kirkuk when gunmen opened fire on him.
Twenty-two men, many with police identification cards, were killed by unknown insurgents who bound their victims and shot them. The bodies were found near Kut. The men may have been targeted for their connection to the police, a frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq. The men appeared to have been dead for at least a month. NOTE: Attack date is approximate.
The Taliban killed Haji Atiqollah, a candidate for the Wolasi Jerga [lower house of Afghan parliament] in Urozgan Province [central Afghanistan] yesterday.  Jan Mohammad Khan, the governor of Urozgan Province, providing further details told Afghan Islamic Agency: The Taliban killed Haji Atiqollah, a candidate for the Wolasi Jerga, in Kakrak area, some 20 km outside Tarin Kot [capital of Urozgan Province], yesterday (27 August).  He added: Haji Atiqollah was walking with his friends when the Taliban fired shots at them, killing Haji Atiqollah and wounding two of his colleagues.  Earlier, Mofti Latifollah Hakimi, the spokesman for the Taliban, told Afghan Islamic Press: The Taliban killed an election candidate, Haji Atiqollah, son of Abdol Ghani, near Tarin Kot yesterday.
Gunmen attacked a police patrol in Baghdad, killing two police officers when they opened fire on the patrol members. Iraqi security forces are the frequent target of insurgent attacks in Iraq.
A crudely-made bomb hidden among liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) tanks on the Dona Ramona passenger ferry in Lamitan, Basilan exploded injuring at least thirty, including nine children.
The United Kuki Liberation Front (UKLF) has claimed responsibility for the killing of a civilian, Henpao Haokip, who the outfit said was awarded capital punishment for his alleged anti- party activities in Pallel area since 2000. The UKLF 'publicity secretary' N. C. Brohlin, in a statement, said that the outfit had given three warnings to him, which were ignored.Note: Incident date is approximate
Palestinian security forces interrupted a terrorist attack when they found several suspects with rockets that they were working to fire at the Qarni-Netzarime road. The security forces confiscated the weapons.
Satopa Yuso, a cleric, was shot dead in front of his mosque in Narathiwat.  Security forces deny any involvement in the killing.
Gunmen assassinated a police lieutenant colonel in Kirkuk when they opened fire on him. Iraqi security forces are the frequent target of insurgent attacks in Iraq.
Gunmen attacked a police patrol in Baghdad, killing the Al-Ghazaliyah district police chief and wounding three of his bodyguards when they opened fire on the patrol. Iraqi security forces are the frequent target of insurgent attacks in Iraq.
Ya Bueraheng, a village headman in the Sungai Kolok district of Narathiwat, was shot and killed by two gunmen.
In Pattani's Khok Po district, three of eleven bombs tied to the pillar of a bridge exploded causing little damage and no injury.  This bombing was thought to be connected to an attack on two bridges in the Nong Chik district.
A bomb exploded behind the Genting Hotel, in conjunction with two others, one at the Plaza Hotel and one at the Kai Na Karaoke Bar.  The five-kilogram bombs were placed in black plastic bags and left at the three sites to be detonated by cell phone.  Of the fifteen civilians injured in the three attacks combined, four were in serious condition.  Ten suspects were arrested for the incidents, including a man identified as Maroning Armer who was seen placing the explosives in front of the karaoke bar.
Employees of a Turkish construction company building a road between Heart and Southern Kandahar were attacked around 5:00pm on 31 August by Taliban militia men.  In the attack, a British engineer and his interpreter were kidnapped and three policemen were killed.  The British embassy in Kabul confirmed that a British national was missing following the incident.  The Taliban has claimed responsibility for the attack, noting that they have a British man in captivity named David.  He was reportedly wounded in the arm in the attack.  One Taliban fighter has been captured.
A former officer in Saddam Husseins army was killed by gunmen in Baqubah when the gunmen opened fire on him. Assassinations of former members of Saddam Husseins regime are fairly common in Iraq.
Two Sunni clerics and three other Sunni men were arrested by men in Interior Ministry Uniforms in Baghdad. Their bodies were found three days later in a morgue. Sunni clerics are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
Police sergeant Thaworn Raknim was killed when a roadside bomb exploded as he escorted teachers to school in the Sungai Padi district of Narathiwat. Another policeman and two of the teachers were also injured.
Loyalists are being blamed for a petrol bomb attack on the Donegall Pass police station in south Belfast.  Unidentified attackers threw five devices at police vehicles parked in a lot near the station.  There were no reported injuries caused by the attack.
The Rashidiya mosque in Basra was attacked by a group of gunmen who opened fire on worshippers during Friday prayers. One mosque guard was killed in the attack. This was one of two attacks on Sunni mosques on this day.
Gunmen opened fire on the car of a policeman in Ninwi Governorate, killing him. Security personnel in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
Insurgents caused an explosion near a major oil pipeline that runs from Kirkuk to Ceyhan, carrying Iraqi oil exports, by lighting fire to some leaking gas. The blast occurred near Fatha and resulted in massive damage to the pipeline and a huge fire. Exports had to be stopped as a result of the attack. The oil industry in Iraq is the frequent target of insurgent attack.
A group of unidentified perpetrators attacked an Ertzaintza police station (autonomous Basque police force) in the town of Ondarroa, in Vizcaya province.  The perpetrators threw Molotov cocktails at the premises, causing damage to the front wall and a police vehicle.  There were no reported injuries.
An explosive device detonated in the garden of Mesut Ekici, the mayor of Havutlu hamlet in Yuregir town, in Adana Province.  Ekici is a member of the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP).  There were no reported injuries.
In Baghdad armed gunmen kidnapped the governor of al-Anbar province, Mamoun Samii Rashid al-Alwani. Members of local governments are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
In Mannar town, a suspected Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) cadre tried to throw a hand grenade at the house of Eelam Peoples Democratic Party leader Harischandran.  Although the grenade missed its intended target, it damaged a nearby house.Note: Incident date approximate
Unknown gunmen killed two civilians and a cleric when they opened fire on the men in front of a mosque in Baghdad following evening prayers.
A cellular service station, operated by the Megafon telecommunications company, was blown up at the outskirts of Nazran in Ingushetia, near the Kavkaz federal highway.A second explosion occurred when investigators and policemen arrived at the scene.  The second bomb was filled with shrapnel and was equivalent to 2 kilograms of TNT.
Gunmen attacked an Interior Ministry commando patrol, killing Colonel Ammar Ismail Arkan, an Interior Ministry commando, and wounding four of Arkans bodyguards were also injured in the attack.
A police station commander from the Zavodskoy district interior directorate was killed on Olimpiyskiy Proezd in  Grozny.  The man was on his way home from work when he was shot at with assault rifles from a Lade car.
A candidate in the upcoming parliamentary elections, Safia Sediqi, was attacked by unidentified men in the Sherzad area of Khogiani District in Nangarhar.  Although Safia Sediqi escaped unhurt, three of her colleagues were injured in the attack.
A car bomb was found parked in a central market in Basra, near where an explosion the previous day killed sixteen people and wounded twenty-one others. The second bomb was safely defused.
The Pakistan People's Party Parliamentarians leader was shot and killed on September 8.  Ramzan Ali Danish, who was also the Gilgit Polo Association President, was shot on Gilgit's Airport Road at 7:30pm local time.
Gunmen detonated an explosive device inside a Shi'a mosque in Baghdad, injuring the mosque guard and damaging the building.
Unidentified gunmen attacked a candidate for election to the lower house and one of his supporters in western He' rat.  The candidate, Zabit Gholam Auz, escaped unharmed when three armed men attacked him on the Heart-Islam Qala highway near the Ali Agha area.  The other man, identified as Nematollah, was shot in the leg and later died due to his injury.  Police have arrested one of the shooters, but the other two escaped.
Gunmen attacked and killed the mayor of Baqubahs al-Yarmouk neighborhood when they opened fire on him in Baqubah. Those who work in the new Iraqi government are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
Gunmen attacked a police patrol in Fallujah, opening fire on the patrol. This was one of two attacks on police patrols in the city on this day which killed a total of three policemen and wounded five others. Exact casualty figures for each attack were not given.NOTE: Casualty numbers are for both police patrol attacks on this day.
Several mortars were fired at the Green Zone In Baghdad, landing near the area where the US embassy, Iraqi parliament, and other government offices are located. No injuries or damage were reported.
Armed officers of the Kabul garrison at Kabul Airport opened fire at a convoy of vehicles associated with the arrival of National Defense Minister General Abdorrahim Wardag in Kabul.  General Wardag arrived in Kabul at 9:25 am after attending a ceremony in Panjsher commemorating the death of national hero Ahmad Shah Masud. As he was leaving the airport in Kabul, four armed men fired at the vehicles, although no one was hurt in the incident.  All four men have been arrested and are under investigation.
Gunmen kidnapped a Lebanese national who was working in Iraq for the Getco Trading company, supplying foodstuff and alcohol to the US and Iraqi armies. The man was identified as Garavet Jean Chekerjian, who also holds Cypriot citizenship. A group calling itself The Group for the Promotion of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice claimed responsibility for the kidnapping and released a video showing Chekerjian on the floor, bound with a gun pointed at his head. The kidnappers said that unless  Getco Trading, which operates out of Cyprus, ceased operations in Iraq, they would kill the hostage. In the video, Chekerjian appealed to the Lebanese embassy and President Lahoud to put pressure on his employers. In a web statement, the group said that the sale of alcohol was a primary crime of Jetco and Chekerjian, as Islam forbids alcohol. On September 13, Getco Trading announced it would close its office in Iraq and cease all operations in the country in order to save Chekerjian.Contractors who work with US and Iraqi forces are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.On January 1, Jikerjian was released by his captors. It is likely that some kind of ransom was paid. The kidnappers had originally demanded $20,000 for the hostages release, but after the company paid this amount, the ransom rose to $2 million dollars. However, the amount or existence of a ransom was not confirmed.
Two bomb explosions damaged the 220 kilovolt ampere transmission line tower in Razakabad on the morning of 11 September.  Initial reports suggest that two of the powers pillars each had half a kilogram of explosives attached to them.  The attack affected the power supply in several areas of Karachi.
Gunmen attacked the motorcade of Ahmad al-Safi, a member of the Iraqi National Assembly and representative of Shi'a leader Grand Ayatollah al-Sistani. The attack occurred in Karbala. Al-Safi was not in the motorcade at the time of the attack, but two of his guards were killed and two wounded during the attack. Members of the Iraqi government are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
In the early hours of 12 September, a group Communist Party of India-Maoists (CPI-Maoist) attacked the village of Bhelbadari in the Giridih district of Jharkhand.  15 civilians were killed and 6 others injured when nearly 100 CPI-Maoists descended upon the village.
Unidentified assailants threw a hand grenade at a television station in Vavuniya district.  The station, located on Vairava Kovil Road, belongs to the Tamil Eelam Liberation Organization.  Following the hand grenade, the assailants opened fire, causing additional damage to the building.
A roadside bomb exploded near a convoy of Iraqi security guards and foreign contract workers in Basra. Four people, all Americans, were killed in the attack. Foreign contractors and Iraqi security forces are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
A terrorist attack was interrupted when US forces found and killed two insurgents who were in the process of planting a roadside bomb in Samarra.
An explosive device detonated at a restaurant in the town of Furiani, on the island of Corsica.  The device severely damaged the premises, but there were no reported injuries.  This was one of two attacks on businesses in this region on this evening.
An unspecified number of petrol bombs and two blast bombs were thrown at the New Barnsley Police Station in west Belfast on the fourth consecutive day of violence in Belfast and surrounding areas.  There were no reported injuries caused in the attack.  Authorities believe the violence started because Protestants are feeling short-changed by the peace process.
A suicide car bomber detonated his vehicle near a gas station, killing eleven people who were lined up to refill gas canisters.This was one of about twelve explosions around Iraq on this day, most centered in Baghdad, all of which were claimed by the group led by Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn. The group released a statement saying that the attacks were retaliation for the recent offensive by US and Iraqi troops in Tall Afar. In total, the attacks killed at least 152 and wounded 542.
Gunmen in Iraqi Army uniforms surrounded Taji, a Sunni village north of Baghdad, kidnapped seventeen men, and shot all of them to death. The dead included a policeman and several men who worked as drivers and construction workers for US forces in Iraq. Security forces and those who cooperate with US forces in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.  The attack occurred on the same day as 12 explosions, mostly in Baghdad, killed 152 and wounded 542. All of those killed in the Taji attack were members of the Tameem tribe.
Palestinians planted two pipe bombs near Rachels Tomb south of Jerusalem. The first exploded, but caused no casualties and the second was found and safely defused. The attack comes following Israeli withdrawal from Gaza Strip and general chaos in the abandoned settlements.
Suspected Kuki Revolutionary Army (KRA) militants opened fire in Karbi Anglong district, killing eight people, including three women and an infant, and injuring five others.  Police reported that a group of men in military fatigues entered Thekerajan village on 14 September and began firing on local villagers.  The remote location of the village has made details difficult to obtain.Note: Injuries are estimated
A suicide car bomber detonated his vehicle near a police patrol in Baghdad's Dora neighborhood.  This was one of two nearly simultaneous blasts in the area against police forces and one of three in the area on this day.  The two blasts killed at least nine police commandos and wounded ten others.  Two civilians were also injured in the blasts.  The three attacks together killed a total of approximately thirty people, including twenty-four police officers.The attacks were claimed by the group loyal to Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn, and come a day after bombings by the same group killed one hundred sixty people and wounded over five hundred seventy.  The group claims the attacks are in retaliation for the recent US offensive in Tal Afar.NOTE: Casualty numbers are for two blasts that occurred together.
A roadside bomb detonated near a police patrol in Kirkuk.  The attack killed two police officers and wounded four others.  Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
Gunmen attacked and killed a police officer in Baqubah with small arms fire and mortars.  Police officers in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.  This was one of three such attacks in this city on this day.
Insurgents fired several mortars at the Green Zone in Baghdad, which houses all government offices.  No casualties or injuries were reported.
A suicide car bomber detonated his vehicle in Baghdad's Dora district by ramming his car into a truck near a group of police commandos.  The attack killed 16 police commandos from the Quick Reaction force and five civilians.  21 people were wounded in the incident.  This was one of three bombings in this area against police forces on this day, killing a total of about 30 people, including 24 police officers.  The attacks were claimed by the group loyal to Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn, and come after a day in which bombings by the group killed 160 people and wounded over 570.  The group says the attacks are in retaliation for the recent US offensive in Tall Afar.
A suicide bombing was interrupted when gunmen found and arrested a suicide bomber near the al-Rasul al-Azam Mosque in Tuz Khormato. The man was wearing a suicide vest and was preparing to perpetrate a coordinated follow-on attack to a previous suicide bombing at the mosque which killed 12 and owned 12. The bomber was of Saudi origin and his device was defused. The man, identified as Mohammad Ali,  claimed that he had been kidnapped and drugged by insurgents who forced him to take on the suicide mission. The interrupted attack comes amid a period of increased violence in Iraq that has left hundreds dead and wounded.
In another wave of attacks on Utilities (following the Sep10-14 attacks), six high voltage towers were bombed in San Carlos, San Rafael, and San Roque.  The perpetrators are unknown.
A suicide bomber detonated his vehicle near a police patrol in Haswa, killing three police officers and wounding six others.  Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.  The attack comes amid a period of increased violence in Iraq which has left hundreds dead and injured.
A senior official reported that someone threw a bomb at Government Middle School in Naway Kalay (North West Frontier Province).  The explosion occurred on 16 September; no casualties were reported.
Members of the Animal Liberation Front (ALF) detonated smoke grenades in the Los Angeles, California home of Guerdon Stuckey, the general manager of LA's city Animal Services Department.  The group stated, military strength smoke grenades were detonated on the floor of this animal killer's abode.  Sleep tightALF.  Animal activists have protested to the city's policy of putting animals to sleep at six shelters.
Gunmen killed a policeman in the Ninawa Governorate Police Command while he was walking with his fiancee in west of Mosul when they opened fire on him. The fiancee was also wounded in the attack.
A group of twenty Taliban militants were arrested in Helmand province on September 17 as they were planting bombs at the Girishk hydroelectric dam.  Afghan and US forces arrested the group following a one-hour standoff.
Police discovered a car bomb in a southeast Baghdad neighborhood and were able to defuse it before it exploded.
Members of the Deruvada squad of the Communist Party of India-Maoist (CPI-Maoist) attacked a revenue office in the Vizianagaram district.  The assailants used bombs to destroy all official records and furniture in the Kurupam office.
Two men with explosives strapped to their bodies were on their way to a polling station in Ghaziabad on September 18 when the explosives detonated.  No other injuries were reported, and the two perpetrators were taken to a hospital in Khost.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosive device near a checkpoint south of Baghdad, in Mahmoudiya, on a road being used by Shiite pilgrims to travel to Karbala for a religious ceremony marking the birth of their messiah. This was one of two similar attacks on checkpoints half-way between Baghdad and Karbala. In this attack, eight Iraqis, including seven police commandos, were killed and two others wounded. In the two attacks combined, 10 people were killed, including seven policemen, a soldier, and two civilians. Twelve people, including several Shiite pilgrims were injured in the attacks. The attack comes amid a surge of violence in the country, much of it targeted at Shiites.
A bomb exploded at 7:30AM in the mail room of the British Embassy in Zagreb, lightly injuring one Croatian employee of the embassy.
Two former supporters of Saddam Hussein were killed when gunmen opened fire on them in Al-Musayyib. The men were identified as Major General Najm Fadil Abbas, a former officer in Saddam Husseins army, and Abd Awn Nimah, a leading member of the Bath party. Former members and supporters of Saddam Husseins regime are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
A gunman opened fire on the vehicle of the UAE Charges dAffaires in Damascus. No one was injured in the attack and investigation suggested that the gunmen was acting alone, without Syrian government support. The man was later found and arrested.
Taliban spokesman Mofti Latifollah Hakimi claimed responsibility on behalf of the group for firing 5 rockets toward the Jalalabad airport on September 20.  One rocket landed in the office of the information and culture department, injuring a guard.  A second rocket landed in the house of Dr. Rahmatollah Rahmanzai next to the flour market in Jalalabad, injuring a child.  Note: Multiple targets.
An Israeli man, Sasson Nouriel, was kidnapped in Jerusalem by Palestinian militants. Several days later his body was found near Beitunia, near Ramallah. The body was found following intelligence from a Hamas cell member who was arrested in connection with the attack. On September 27, Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack, saying they had intended to exchange Nouriel for Palestinian prisoners, but had killed him following Israeli arrests of Palestinians in the West Bank. The group also claimed that Nouriel was a Shin Beth spy. The group released a video showing Nouriel, bound and blindfolded. The group has announced its intention to kidnap Israeli citizens and soldiers to secure the release of Palestinian prisoners.The incident comes during a period of renewed violence in the region.On October 10, 2005, Israeli security forces announced that they had broken up three Hamas cells and arrested several suspects believed to have been involved in the kidnapping.
Insurgents detonated an explosive device near an oil facility in Kirkuk. The explosion damaged several nearby pipelines and caused a large fire. Ten members of the force responsible for protecting oil pipelines were arrested in connection with the attack. Oil pipelines and the oil industry is the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
A police officer was killed when gunmen opened fire on him while he was patrolling in Baghdad. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
A home-made timing device attached to a bomb and strapped to a bicycle detonated outside the public toilets located near Minar-e-Pakistan in Lahore.  The blast killed one vendor, Ghulam Yasin, and injured 15 others.  The incident was part of a coordinated attack in which another bicycle-bomb exploded approximately one hour later, killing five people.
An electricity pylon in Molina di Quosa was blown up by an explosive device.  No further information about the attack is available, but in May 2006, ten anarchists were arrested and charged in connection with this attack.
Palestinian militants fired five rockets at Israel from Northern Gaza, but no damage or injuries were caused as the rockets landed in empty fields. The attack was claimed by the Palestinian Islamic Jihad which said the attack was retaliation for the killing of three Islamic Jihad members by Israeli troops earlier in the day during a raid in Tulkarm. The attack was the first since Israel completed its pullout from Gaza Strip.
Three Turkoman Front officials were killed and another was wounded when gunmen attacked the men as they were leaving their offices in Mosul.
A group calling itself Oxford Arson Group claimed responsibility for an attempted arson attack at the Corpus Christi College sports pavilion in Oxford.  The incident caused minor damages.  Authorities believe the Oxford Arson Group to be connected to the Animal Liberation Front (ALF).  In their statement of claim, the group threatens massive losses if the university continues its construction of an animal research lab.
Four qassam rockets were fired at the Sederot settlement. The attack was one of dozens in the region on this day, launched by Palestinian militants following a large explosion at a Hamas rally that killed many Palestinians. Although the blast was an accident, Palestinian groups blamed Israelis and said their mortar attacks were in retaliation. Only light injuries were caused in the attacks.The attack was claimed by the military wing of Hamas.
A quassam rocket was fired at southern Israel, landing near Prime Minister Sharon's ranch. The device did not explode and caused no damage. The unexploded device was found about three weeks after it was fired, according to security officials. NOTE: Attack date is approximate
A suicide bomber detonated his explosive device near a police convoy carrying elite Iraqi police commandos in Baghdad. The attack killed thirteen people in total, including ten police commandos, and wounded twelve others, also including several police commandos. The attack was claimed by the group led by Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn.
Two explosive devices detonated in front of the UK embassy in Tehran. No damage was reported and no injuries were caused.
A bomb attack from the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) left La Hormiga and San Miguel municipalities without electricity.  One person was killed in the ensuing gunfire.
On 25 September, members of the National Liberation Front of Tripura (NLFT) attempted to run down a Special Police Officer camp at Shantinagar.  When this attempt failed, the assailants opened fire on the village of Debnath Para, killing eight non-tribal villagers, including four women and two children, and injuring three others.
Armed gunmen in police uniforms stormed a Shi'a school in a village near Iskandariyah, forcing five male teachers and the school bus driver into a room and shooting all six.
Gunmen kidnapped a senior Shiite official and member of the Supreme Council of Islamic Revolution in Iraq (SCIRI), Azhar Qassem Abdul Wahid, as he was leaving the SCIRI headquarters in Qurna, near Basra. Wahid was shot dead by his kidnappers and his body dumped on a roadside near Basra.
The Royal Nepalese Army (RNA) has reported that more than 250 students from different parts of the country have been recently kidnapped by Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M).  Of these, 200 students from the Rukum district were abducted on 26 September, and 70 students  were abducted from various areas in the Accham district on 25 September.Note: Multiple incident dates
Gunmen assassinated Major Fakhir Husayn, an officer in the Anti-Terrorism Unit in Kirkuk when they opened fire on his vehicle. Another person traveling in the car was also wounded in the attack.
Several mortar shells were fired at a police station in Al-Azamiyah neighborhood in Baghdad. However, the mortars missed their target. One mortar landed on the teachers training school in Al-Azamiyah, damaging the school and causing some injuries (although numbers were not given).
The central Kirkuk police chief, Birhan Habib, was the target of an assassination attempt when gunmen attacked  his convoy with gunfire near the al-Noor Mosque in Kirkuk. The attack injured two of his bodyguards and three civilian bystanders. Habib was not injured in the attack. Police officials are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
Six masked gunmen broke into the house of Maksharip Belkharoyev, a prominent Islamic faith healer from the village of Alkhasty, killing him and gravely wounding his daughter.  Belkharoyev had in the past been publicly critical of Wahhabism.
An explosive device was detonated in the home of a bodyguard of Shiite cleric Moqtada al-Sadr, Qassem Mansour. The blast killed two people and wounded eight others, all relatives of Mansour, and occurred in Najaf. The blast caused a large fire in the house. It was unclear who perpetrated the attack, although one man was seen running from the house right after the blast.
A Hyderabad Bomb Disposal Squad official reported that a time bomb was used to blow up a foot-long piece of the tracks outside Kotri Railway Station.  The explosion occurred just before a Karachi-bound Shah Latif Express train was scheduled to pass by.  Although the explosion left a two-foot-deep crater, only two people were injured in the incident.Note: Incident date is approximate.
Gunmen opened fire on a carload of teachers near Baqubah, killing one. Three teachers survived the attack. This is the second attack on teachers in Iraq in one week. The dead teacher was identified as Jassim Kareem.
Three suicide car bombers detonated their vehicles about 10 minutes apart in close proximity to each other in the Shiite town of Balad. The attacks combined killed 102 people and wounded close to 150. Most of the dead were civilians, although the city police chief Col. Kadhim Abdul Razzaq and four other police officers were killed as well. Casualty numbers for specific attacks were not given as the devices exploded so close together, in terms of time and location. All three blasts were claimed by the Al-Qaeda affiliated group, Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn.The first bomb exploded in a vegetable market; the second bomb exploded near a bank; and the third bomb exploded on a street of clothing shops.  All three blasts occurred in close proximity to each other and had the same target.On November 1, 2005, Iraqi security officials announced that a Moroccan terrorist who lives in Syria,  Muhsen Khayber, and is also known as Abdul Rahim, was the mastermind behind the coordinated suicide bombings in Balad. Spanish officials believe Khayber is linked to the Ansar al-Islam organization, an Islamic group based in northern Iraq.Note: Casualty numbers are for all three attacks combined.
The Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC)-Union of Combatants, claimed responsibility for a rocket attack targeting the Ajaccio prefecture, on the island of Corsica.  The group states that they perpetrated the attack in response to the government's plan to privatize ferry operations on the island.  In their statement, the FLNC refers to the prefect of Corsica as, a prefect of convenience and real inquisitor.
Police found a woman with an explosive vest under her clothes at a checkpoint in Baghdad. The woman was on her way to a flea market where she planned to detonate her explosive device. They arrested the women and defused her device.
In Dantewada district, three men suspected of attending an anti-Maoist peace initiative were killed and another was injured by members of the Communist Party of India-Maoists (CPI-Maoist) in Pariharpara village on September 30.
A lieutenant colonel in the Iraqi army, Hatim al-Rubay'i, was assassinated in Al-Anbar governorate when gunmen opened fire on him. Military officers are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
Unknown assailants blew up an explosive in front of a Government clinic in Brahmanbaria district.  While investigating the site, police found pamphlets warning of more attacks if hotels and restaurants do not remain closed during Ramadan.
In the Lohardaga district, ten employees of the Hindustan Aluminiaum Company were injured, six dump trucks were burned, and two trucks and one proclain machine were damaged when thirty members of the Communist Party of India-Maoists attacked a serias of Bauxite mines owned by the Birla group on October 1.
The son of a top official in one of Iraq's ministries was kidnapped in northern Iraq. No further information was provided. Family members of government employees are the frequent target of kidnapping.
Hamas gunmen attacked a Palestinian Police force headquarters' building near the Al-Shati refugee camp, firing mortar shells at it. Three people were killed, including one police major, and 50  were wounded in the attack. The attack comes following a disappointing showing in Palestinian elections for Hamas. The victims were identified as Major Ali Makkawi, deputy chief of Al-Shati Camp Police, Hiyma Nassar, and Umar al-Shinti. Two other police stations were also attacked on this day. The attacks were in response to attempts by Palestinian police to enforce the ban on displaying weapons in public.
Militants from Hamas attacked a Palestinian police station in Gaza with RPGs and mortar fire. This was one of three police stations attacked on this day in Gaza. The most deadly attack occurred at the Al-Shati refugee camp police station, where 50 people were injured and 3 killed. No casualties were reported for this specific attack. The attacks were in response to attempts by Palestinian police to enforce the ban on displaying weapons in public.
A roadside bomb exploded near the convoy of Iraq's Oil Minister, Ibrahim al-Uloum, in Baghdad as he was traveling to Beiji for a ceremony marking the opening of a rebuilt refinery in the city. The explosion killed three of al-Uloum's bodyguards, wounded one, and destroyed several of the vehicles in the convoy, but al-Uloum was not injured in the attack. Members of the Oil Ministry and the oil industry itself (pipelines and refineries) are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
In Jaffna District, members of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) killed a supporter of the Eelam Peoples Democratic Party, identified as Kitnan Parameshwaram, on October 3 in Vannarapannai.
Members of Jamatul Mujahedin Bangladesh (JMB) are believed to be responsible for a series of five bomb blasts targeting courts that killed two people and injured 38.  One  attack occurred in Laxmipur district, where one person was arrested in connection with the attack.  The suspect claimed that JMB had asked him to conduct the attacks.   Note: Fatality and inury figures are approximate.
A suicide car bomber detonated his vehicle outside the Green Zone in Baghdad, at the checkpoint for the main civilian entrance. The attack killed three Iraqi policemen and wounded seven other people including five police officers. The Green Zone, which houses US and government offices, is the frequent target of insurgent attack.
Three employees of an NGO, Afghan Aid, were abducted from Kamdesh district in Nurestan province on October 4.  After being beaten up and told not to work with the government any longer, the hostages were released on October 8.
A United Nations car parked in front of the house of a member of the international police force was bombed shortly afer midnight without injury.  The blast damaged some nearby cars and the windows of a shop.
A car bomb exploded in Baghdads Al-Karrada district as a police patrol passed, wounding one civilian and causing damage to nearby shops. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
In Anantnag, an unidentified assailant threw a grenade at the General Bus Stand, injuring 16 people.Note: Incident date is approximate.
Insurgents detonated an explosive device near an  oil pipeline in Kirkuk, causing damage to the pipeline. Oil pipelines in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
Insurgents detonated an explosive device near an oil pipeline near Kirkuk, damaging the pipeline and causing a large fire. Oil pipelines in Iraq and the oil industry generally are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and injured a deputy of the assassinated former Palestinian security chief Moussa Arafat, in Gaza City. Bassam Azam, a senior officer in the Palestinian military intelligence, was shot  in front of his house in Gaza City.
A  fire was set at a Ford dealership in Quilmes when tires were sprayed with aerosol and set on fire.  In three separate (although perhaps coordinated) attacks, the Che Guevara Anti-Imperialist Command left leaflets that read: No to Bush, no to imperalism. Colonel Dorrego Anti-Imperialist Command.  The attacks were against the Summit of the Americas planned 3-5 November 2005 in Mar del Plata.  Explosives were thrown at a Citibank branch in San Miguel and a fire ensued causing minor damage but not injuries or fatalities.  A major fire was started at a Blockbuster video in San Martin.  70% of the store was destroyed but there were no injuries or fatalities.  In the Quilmes district, another Citibank branch was set on fire with tar and fuel.  This was also a minor fire with no injuries or fatalities reported.  There were no leaflets found at the Ford dealership, however the police were investigating its relation to the other three fires.  Other Sources: Buenos Aires Canal 13 Television 6 October
In Trincomalee district, an activist of the Eelam Peoples Democratic Party, Kinsley Weeraratne, was shot and killed by Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) gunmen in Pallaiyuttu on October 6.
Gunmen opened fire on a truck driver working with US forces in Baghdad, killing him. Contractors who work with US and Iraq forces are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
Armed men attacked five members of the rapid deployment force in Diyala Governorate with gunfire, wounding all five. Security force members in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
In Ganaidori, Mohammad Maqbool Lone, a Peoples Democratic Party activist, was wounded when shot by unidentified gunmen in the Alamgarhi Bazar area.Note: Incident date is approximate
Insurgents detonated an explosive device near an oil pipeline that runs from Kirkuk to the Bayji refinery, causing significant damage to the pipeline and interrupting oil flow. The attack occurred in Debs, near Kikurk. Oil pipelines in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.NOTE: Attack date approximate.
Gunmen opened fire on a police patrol in Mosul, wounding two police officers. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
Unidentified perpetrators threw an incendiary device at the entrance to the Republican Left of Catalonia office in Barcelona.  The device started a small fire, which was detected by police officers and extinguished.  The door to the building was only slightly damaged in the attack.
A car bomb exploded outside a building housing members of the Shiite Badr Brigade in Basra, which is associated with the government. The attack killed two people and wounded three others and also damaged the building. Former Basra governor Hassan al-Rashid, a senior leader of the group, was in the building at the time but was not injured.
Gunmen attacked a group of contractors who work for US forces in Baiji, killing two and wounding five others.  Contractors who work with US forces are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
Gunmen fired five mortar shells at a hotel in Hillah that serves as the US embassy region office. One mortar hit the building, causing significant damage, but no injuries were caused.
Gunmen opened fire at an Arab League convoy in Baghdad, which was carrying the Arab League delegation to the headquarters of the Association of the Muslim Scholars for the Iftar, the meal used to break the fast during Ramadan.  The convoy was also targeted by a roadside bomb. No injuries were reported among the delegation. However, two members of the security force who were escorting the delegation were killed and eight others injured in the attack.
Four Iraqis who worked as contractors for US forces in Iraq were killed by unknown gunmen who blindfolded them and killed them. The bodies were found in Haweija. Those who work with US forces are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.Note: Date given is that on which bodies were found. Attack may have been earlier.
Gunmen opened fire on Police Major Muhammad Athir Midhat in Baghdad, wounding him.  Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
On October 10, four Hizbul Mujahideen (HM) gunmen entered the houses of Munshi Ram in Dhara village, and later Kartar Singh in Gabbar village, slitting the throats of five people in each house.  Both men had been accused of being police informants by HM.
Lt. Sa'd al-Tikriti, a police officer in the Major Crimes Department at the Salah-al-Din province, was killed when unknown attackers threw a grenade at him as he left his house in Tikrit. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
Gunmen opened fire with machine guns at a police patrol in al-Ghadir district of Baghdad, wounding nine policemen. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
Shopian Councilor of Municipal Committee and Congress Party activist Mohammad Shafi Banday was attacked by unidentified gunmen on October 11.  Banday escaped unhurt, but his driver was killed and a police escort was injured in the attack.
Insurgents launched several mortars at an oil complex near Kirkuk, in Fatiha, hitting a gas pipeline and causing a large fire which spread to two oil pipelines. The pipelines affected run from Kirkuk to the Bayji refinery. The attack disrupted oil flow and gas exports through the Turkish Ceyhan port. Mortars were used as the facility was well-guarded and secured, so insurgents could not reach the pipeline to plant the device. Oil pipelines in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
An Islamic party office was attacked in Samarra. The attack comes several days before the constitutional referendum in the country and following the shift of the Sunni party from opposing to supporting the constitution after last minute amendments to the constitution were made. The attacks were likely perpetrated by Sunnis angry at the groups move. This was one of three attacks on the group's headquarters buildings in Samarra on this day and one of several targeting the party throughout the country. No injuries were reported in the attacks.
The Canadian embassy residence in Kabul was hit by a rocket at 4:10 am (local time) on October 12; a few hours before United States Secretary of State Condoleeza Rice was scheduled to arrive in Kabul.  The rocket wounded an embassy guard and damaged a wall outside the residence.
Shaykh Muhammad Husayn al-Asadi, one of the representatives for Ayatollah Ali Al-Sistani, a major Shiite leader, was assassinated by gunmen who opened fire on him in front of his home in southern Baghdad.
Iraqi and US security forces prevented a terrorist attack on a truck carrying ballots from the Iraqi Electoral Commission when they used a decoy convoy to draw the fire of a insurgents who were waiting to ambush the real Electoral commission truck. The incident occurred near Muqtadiya and involved not only gunfire but roadside bomb explosions. Security personnel returned fire and the attackers fled.
An improvised explosive device (IED) exploded on the Kavkaz highway near the village of Gazi-Yurt, as a vehicle carrying personnel of the Federal Bodyguard Service was passing by.  The bomb contained the equivalent of 1.5 kg of TNT.
Gunmen fired on a polling station in Baghdad on the night before the October 15 constitutional referendum was to begin. The attack was one of four in the capital on this night. No casualties were reported.
Insurgents attacked electricity towers north of Baghdad, cutting off electricity supply to Baghdad. The attack occurred the night before the October constitutional referendum was to begin. Although the attack did not disrupt voting, the power remained out in much of the city during the election and ballot counting.
Gunmen detonated a roadside bomb near an Iraqi police patrol near the village of Shah Qarraq. The explosion killed four police officers and wounded three others. The patrol was on its way to guard a polling station in the village on the day before the country's constitutional referendum.
A mortar was fired at the Green Zone in Baghdad on the day before the constitutional referendum in the country. No one was injured in the attack.
Two Iraqi policemen were injured when a roadside bomb exploded near their convoy in Baghdad. The explosion occurred as the police patrol was inspecting the area leading to one of the polling stations to be used in the constitutional referendum being carried out on this day.
Gunmen fired a rocket at a polling center in Baghdad during voting for the October 15 constitutional referendum. The explosion injured on civilian. This was one of five attacks on Baghdad polling stations.
Gunmen attacked a group of police near a polling station in Baghdad, killing on civilian. The attack occurred during voting hours on the day of Iraq's October 15 Constitutional referendum.
Five people were injured when a large bomb exploded in a car, parked in a gas station in Maslak, in Istanbul province.  The attack occurred in the lot of the OPET gas station and caused damage to the station and several vehicles parked nearby.  The Kurdistan Freedom Hawks (TAK) issued a statement claiming responsibility for the attack and stated that the damage exceeded what was originally reported in the media.  They also stated that the intended target of the attack was the Army Mutual Aid Association building nearby.
Gunmen attacked a convoy transporting referendum voting cards along a road north of Baghdad, with a roadside bomb, killing three Iraqi soldiers. The attack occurred on the day following the October 15 constitutional referendum.
Unidentified assailants entered  the home of Mawlawi Noor Ahmed Jan, head of the Local Religious Scholars' Council in Ghazi Abad, and killed him.
On October 16, Mawlawi Mohammad Gol, a member of the council of religious scholars, was killed in Bolan by members of the Taliban.
Gunmen opened fire on two policemen in Kirkuk, killing both. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
The head of the Sangin District Intelligence Department, Brig-Gen Mohammad Daud, was killed by unidentified assailants in an attack in Helmand Province.  Dauds bodygard was also killed in the attack, which was not the first attempt on his life.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, wounding one police officer. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) blew up an energy pylon as part of ongoing violence in the Department since the beginning of October 2005.  There were no reports of fatalities or injuries, however the electricity from Norte de Santander to Arauca was cut.
A missile landed on the house of Haji Abdus Samad in Bajaur Agency, North West Frontier Province on October 18.  The resulting explosion killed two women.
Two containers of explosives were found under a bridge in Ahvaz. Two suitcases with TNT, explosives, and fuses inside were found and defused.
Muhsin Chitheer, a lieutenant colonel in the former Iraqi army under Sadam Hussein, was assassinated by gunmen in Baghdad who opened fire on him in front of his home. Officers from the former military are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
Two mortars were fired at the Green Zone in Baghdad. The attack occurred as Saddam Hussein's trial began in Baghdad. No injuries were reported in the attack.
An oil pipeline south of Samarra that connects the Beiji and Dora refineries was the target of an insurgent attack when gunmen detonated an explosive device near the pipeline. The explosion caused significant damage to the pipeline and a large fire. Oil pipelines and the oil industry are frequent targets of insurgent attacks in Iraq.
District Chief Haji Ahmadullah Khan was attacked by Taliban gunmen in his homes mosque as he was saying his evening Ramadan prayers.  Khan died in the attack, but no others were injured.
A Katyusha rocket was fired at a public school, the Dijlah Primary School, in the Mansour district of Baghdad, killing one child and two guards and wounding five other students and a shop keeper from a nearby store. Schools and teachers in Iraq have become an increasingly frequent target of insurgent attack.
An explosive device detonated at the courthouse in Batman, causing same damage to the building, but no casualties.  On 3 November, police arrested four people they accused of perpetrating this attack, including one woman.  In their raid of the suspects' homes, police detained organizational documents and unused explosives.
A pickup truck owned by Payom Chaiman, a community development official, exploded shortly after his wife, Pairin, had parked the vehicle by the town hall to run errands. No one was injured and only minor property damage was caused by the blast.
Members of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) burned a bus on the Caracoli-Medellin route, 15 minutes from Magdalena Medio.  The driver and his assistant were killed.  There was no report of other passengers on the bus.
Two gunmen on motorcycles opened fire on a beef shop, injuring Marohyuning Udae, an assistant village head, and Yako Mana, a meat trader, in Yala's Raman district.
Gunmen assassinated Shaykh Ahmad al-Shammari, the imam of Imam al-Mahdi Mosque in Balad Ruz, when they opened fire on him in the city. Al-Shammari is affiliated with Shiite cleric Moqtada al-Sadr.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) were implicated by police in bomb blasts on an electrical substation in Tulua.  After a fire broke out at the station, a few municipalities lost power.  Technicians restored power later in the day.  There were no casualties reported, but Pacific Energy Company officials claimed that more than 1 million dollars in damage resulted from the attack.
Gunmen killed the leader of a Shiite anti-Saddam group and his driver on a highway outside of Amarah, in southern Iraq, when they opened fire on the vehicle carrying the two men. The attack comes amid a rise in sectarian violence and as the first trial against Saddam Hussein begins in Iraq.
A police colonel and his family were attacked in Tikrit, when a bomb exploded near the colonel's car. Lt. Col. Haitham Akram was getting into his car with his two sons and wife when a bomb exploded near his car, killing him and both sons and wounding his wife. Two children bystanders were also killed in the attack. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
Insurgents detonated an explosive device near an oil pipeline used to transport oil to the Turkish port of Ceyhan. The explosion forced the cessation of oil exports on the pipeline. Oil pipelines and the oil industry in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack. This was one of four explosions on this pipeline on this day.
In Khost, a complex housing government offices in Domanda District was attacked by unidentified assailants.  After trading gunfire with police officers for thirty minutes, the gunmen escaped without seriously damaging the building.Note: Incident date is approximate.
An explosive device was found hidden under a caravan parked near several government buildings in Grozny, including the district prosecutors office and the district administration building. The bomb was safely defused. Officials speculate that the government building may have been the target.
A roadside bomb exploded in Baghdad near a police patrol, wounding two police officers. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
Three suicide car bombs were detonated in a coordinated attack targeting two Baghdad hotels used by foreign journalists. All three bombs exploded in front of rolling TV cameras in front of the Palestine hotel and the Sheraton hotel. The attacks killed at least 20 people together. At least 40 people were injured in the attack. About five Iraqi police may have been among the dead. Two AP employees, three photographers, and three other journalists were among the injured. The attack may have been an attempt to kidnap foreign journalists who are the frequent target of insurgent attack. Other sources reported that the attack was not a kidnapping attempt, but simply an attempt to kill people in a central place where the attack could be televised. Rocket and mortar fire were also launched at the hotels during the attack. The hotels are located in the square where the statue of Saddam Hussein was toppled following the US invasion and the fall of Baghdad.  The first blast occurred when a bomber slammed his vehicle into the heavy blockades surrounding the Sheraton and Palestine hotels, near a police post in front of the two hotels. The blast opened a path for another, larger bomb which exploded several minutes later.  All three blasts were claimed by the al-Qaeda linked group Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn.  On November 2, Iraqi security forces announced that members of the elite Interior Ministry Wolf Brigade had arrested several individuals suspected of involvement in the attack.On November 26, Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn posted a video on their website showing how the group planned and carried out the attacks. The narrator said the Palestine hotel was occupied by foreign journalists and security companies, but that the Sheraton was the main target because it housed assassination teams, intelligence groups, and US soldiers.Note: Casualties are for all attacks combined.
On October 24, rockets fired from Jarob Zar hills in Badakhshan Province landed near the provincial intelligence department compound in Faizabad.  No one was injured in the attack, and no property damage was reported.  A police search of the Jarob Zar hills yielded one rocket, but the attackers managed to escape.
A suicide bomber detonated his vehicle outside the Ministry of Pershmerga Affairs building in Sulaimaniyah. Pershmerga are Kurdish Security personnel. The attack killed six pershmerga and three civilians and wounded two pershmerga and two civilians. It was one of three suicide bombs in the city on this day. The other two targeted the convoy of a senior Patriotic Union of Kurdistan Party official.  Initial reports suggested that both attacks were claimed by the al-Qaeda linked group Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn. However, on October 26, a Kurdistani brigade linked with al-Qaeda, Jihad Pegah, claimed the attacks.  On October 25, sources reported the security forces in the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan regional government were able to kill the mastermind of these attacks during a raid of his house in the Homerekwer District. One security officer, Lieutenant Khalil Muhammad Rashid, was killed in the raid.
Gunmen kidnapped Yalmaz Jaafar, the sister of the Minister of Housing and Reconstruction, Jassim Mohammed Jaafar, on a highway between Tirkit and Kirkuk. She was kidnapped with two of her colleagues, the brother of the head of the Tikrit Health Directorate, Mahdi Zainulabidine, and the head of an agricultural services firm in Tikrit. Family members of government officials are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.On October 27, officials reported that Jaafar had been released, although the two men were still in captivity.
An explosive device detonated at law courts in Ordizia, in Guipuzcoa province.  This was one of four explosive attacks targeting courts in the Basque country on this evening.  No further information is available.  On 28 December, the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) claimed responsibilty for twenty-one attacks in the region, including five targeting courthouses.
Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade claimed responsibility for firing two rockets at the town of Sederot.  The organization stated that the attack was in response to Israel's killing Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.  One rocket was reported to have landed in an industrial zone.  No injuries were reported.
Gunmen opened fire at the convoy of Abdul Latif Rashid, a cabinet official and the minister of water resources, in Baghdad. Rashid was not in the convoy at the time of the attack, but two of his bodyguards were wounded. Government officials are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
Five Israelis were killed and more than twenty wounded when a suicide bomber blew himself up in a crowded marketplace in the coastal city of Hadera.  Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility for the attack, stating that it was in retaliation for Israels killing of the organizations West bank military commander, Luay Saadi, on 24 October 2005.  The bomber was identified as Hassan Abu Zeid from Qabatiyeh.  It was reported that he was released from an Israeli prison approximately one month prior to the attack.Palestinian officials and others have warned that Israels month-long campaign of arrests and killing in the West Bank could result in such an attack.  To date, the Israeli army has killed twenty-eight Palestinians in assassinations or during arrests since it withdrew from the Gaza Strip in September.  The Jerusalem Post reported that the alleged planner of the attack, Jihad Zakarne, may have been killed in a shoot-out between IDF troops and Islamic Jihad fugitives in Kabatiya on 31 October 2005.  NOTE: Number of injuries is approximate
Sunni insurgents kidnapped a member of Shiite cleric Muqtada al-Sadr's Madhi Army. Members of the Madhi Army raided a house in Nahrawan and freed the hostage and captured two militants. The incident was followed by a larger clash when Sunni insurgents ambushed the Madhi Army as they left Nahrawan. The attack is one of a growing number of religiously motivated incidents.
Eight teachers from Sarsawati Higher Secondary School, including Headmaster Rabindra Jha, were abducted in the Gungapriya area of Rautahat district.  It is believed that Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) are responsible for the kidnapping.Note: Incident date is approximate.
Following the killing of several of their operatives, members of the Janajuddha faction of the  Purbo Banglar Communist Party (PBCP) killed five workers of the ruling Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP).  The attacks took place in four different districts over the course of 8 hours (spanning October 26 and 27).One attack took place in Chuadanga, where a man named Zamir Ali was killedNote: Incident date is approximate
A Qassam rocket was launched at the town of Sederot.  Security forces stated that the rocket landed on Palestinian territory near the former Eley Sinai settlement.  No injuries were reported.
A suicide bomber detonated his truck bomb in the Shiite town of Howaider in a crowded market just as residents and merchants were breaking the daily Ramadan fast. The bomber had filled his truck with dates and a crowd of people had gathered near it to buy the produce when he detonated the device. The attack killed 30 people and wounded 42 others.
One police officer was killed when gunmen opened fire on him in Baghdad. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
A Qassam rocket fell near the Sederot settlement during the evening of Saturday 29 October.  The Israeli Defense Forces responded by firing artillery at areas in the northern Gaza Strip thought to house Qassan-related infrastructure.
The gas pipeline that provides gas to Quetta and the surrounding areas was damaged by a bomb near Sibi in Balochistan province, causing a temporary interruption in supplies to the area.  Officials report that the explosion occurred around midnight on October 29, however they do not know who is responsible for the explosion.
A series of three bombings occurred in Delhi on the evening of October 29, killing at least 59 and injuring approximately 210 others.  The bombs were all located in different areas, but they all blew up within minutes of each other.  A fourth bomb was found and defused outside the State Bank of Bikaner in the Chandni Chowk area.  Police are investigating the explosions, though they do not yet know who is responsible.
A roadside bomb exploded near a convoy of oil tanker trucks south of Baghdad. The bomb completely destroyed one of the trucks and killed both men inside. Four civilian passers-by were wounded in the attack. The oil industry and its workers are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
Several mortars were fired at the headquarters of an Interior Ministry Brigade in Baghdad. No injuries were reported in the attack. Interior Ministry security forces are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.The attack was claimed by the al-Qaeda linked group Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn.
Boualem S. was shot and killed outside of a caf and Boudjemaa Arrar was killed inside a nearby shop by suspected members of the Salafist Group for Call and Combat (GSPC).  Arrar had taken up arms against terrorists in 1994.  Both victims were known in the community for contributing to the growth of the local sporting movement.  A ten-year old child was injured in the attack.  The attack occurred on the same day that a deputy in Algeria's National People's Assembly was injured by a bomb planted in his car.
Three Christian girls were beheaded by six masked men as they returned home from the Central Sulawesi Christian high school in Poso.  Another girl survived the attack with machete wounds to her face and the back of her head.  Violent attacks occurred in Poso between Muslims and Christians in 2000 and 2001, killing upwards of 1,000 people.  A peace deal was reached in December 2001, however bouts of violence have continued.  This attack appears to be the first recent beheading.
Several mortars were fired at the Iraqi Oil Ministry building in Baghdad. The mortars missed their target and landed in the nearby intersection, killing one civilian, wounding four others, and damaging several vehicles. The oil industry in Iraq is the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
A senior Interior Ministry Officer, Brigadier General Jamal Ahmad, was killed along which his wife when armed men attacked them in Baghdad. Interior Ministry personnel, security forces, and government officials are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
A woman was killed by a bomb explosion that was triggered by members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) in Gulmi district.
Gunmen in Baghdad opened fire on a police officer, killing him. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
Three Iraqis, one of whom was a police officer, were kidnapped in Tikrit by unknown gunmen. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attacks. Kidnappings of citizens are also very common.
A bomb exploded in front of a popular fast food restaurant in Baqubah, injuring four people. The was the first of several similar attacks over a period of 12 hours in the city, although this was the only one that resulted in casualties.
Insurgents detonated a bomb in a vegetable market in Baghdad, wounding five civilians.
A roadside bomb exploded next to a minibus carrying employees of the Oil Ministry to work in Baghdad. The explosion wounded five Oil Ministry employees. Employees of the Iraqi oil industry  and of the government's Oil Ministry are the frequent target of attacks by insurgents who seek to undermine the industry and its ability to contribute to Iraqi development.
A bomb exploded in front of a popular fast food restaurant in Baqubah. No injuries were caused in the blast, but significant material damage to the restaurant and nearby shops occurred. This was one of four such attacks in the city on this day and followed another similar attack the night before which did cause injuries.
Two explosive charges detonated near a security forces patrol in Kirkuk, wounding five personnel. Security personnel in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
A parcel bomb, made up of a battery operated detonator and 50 grams of gunpowder, was sent to the Mayor of Bologna, Sergio Cofferati.  The device was discovered and defused by experts before it could self-detonate.  Authorities believe that the bomb could have caused serious injuries to anyone who opened it.  Cofferati is a left-wing mayor who has recently been targeted by right-wing protestors over his stance against crime.  A group calling themselves the Fire and Fire-related Cooperative warned of the device in a leaflet.  This group is believed to be a part of the Informal Anarchist Federation (FAI).  Police are investigating whether this device is related to others that have been sent to EU officials and Italian politicians in the last year.
The house of former Bharatiya Janata Party Minister Arbindo Dhali was attacked in Malkangiri on November 2.  Despite police guarding the house, over 150 members of the  Communist Party of India-Maoists (CPI-Maoist) were able to surround the house, wrestle firearms from the police, and successfully bomb the house, killing one civilian.
A petrol bomb was thrown at a provincial prison injuring a man and his son.  In other parts of the city, police found and diffused six explosive devices.  Militants also bombed a cooking-gas depot and a power pole.  Security forces had been on high alert ahead of the end of Ramadan, as authorities feared a rise in attacks at the end of the Muslim fasting period.
The Ninawa police commander was attacked by gunmen outside of Mosul. The commander was not injured in the attack, although two of his bodyguards were injured. Police officials in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
Two police officers were shot at and killed by unidentified assailants using automatic weapons.  The officers were at the Baltorg market in Nazran and the shooting occurred at 1600 hours Moscow time.
Malih Humud Mustafa al-Luhaybi, a tribal chieftain, and his son were killed by armed gunmen in the city of Jalawla.
Unknown perpetrators bombed the oil pipeline that takes oil from Arauca to the Caribbean.  There were no casualties reported.  Ecopetrol has sent crews to repair the pipe.
Unidentified assailants fired at the car of an employee of Ingushetia's branch of the Federal Security Service (FSB), killing him.  The attackers fled the scene.
Gunmen attacked a minibus carrying a Kurdish Shiite family near Baghdad, when they opened fire on the bus. The family was returning from visiting a family cemetery near Balad Ruz. The attack killed twelve members of the family and wounded two others. The attack was likely motivated by sectarian tension between Shiites and Sunnis.
A British aid worker was killed in an ambush by approximately twenty Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) rebels near Tubas, 12 kilometers from the Ugandan-Sudanese border.  Collin Lee and his pregnant wife worked for the International Aid Services (IAS) relief organization and were traveling with a driver from Uganda to southern Sudan to participate in a trauma counseling workshop for victims of war.  Rebels fired into the car, hitting Lee in the chest and throat, and injuring the driver.  The rebels threatened to set the vehicle on fire but were persuaded not to.  Two aid agencies stopped working in northern Uganda in October 2005 after the LRA killed two aid workers in ambushes.
Gunmen opened fire on a group of civilians and police near a bus stop in Baghdad. The attack killed a policeman and wounded five other people. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Prime Minister Ali Mohamed Gedi's convoy was attacked in Mogadishu.  Gunmen attacked the convoy killing five and wounding an unknown amount of people.  This was only the Prime Minster's second visit to the capital since being appointed the head of the transitional government.  He had previously stayed away from the capital because of security concerns. The Prime Minister was not injured in the attack.
Unknown perpetrators threw a Molotov cocktail at a Bank of Cyprus branch in Athens.  The device started a fire, which caused over 100,000 euros in damage.  Witnesses say that a young man threw the bomb.  No group claimed responsibility for the attack.
Insurgents attacked a group of security personnel guarding oil pipelines in Thibban, north of Baghdad, with gunfire. Two security guards were killed and thirteen others injured in the attack. The oil industry in Iraq, including its pipelines, employees, and security guards, are the frequent target of insurgent attack by those who hope to undermine the oil industry and the new regime.
Several mortars were fired at the Ministry of Youth and Sports building in Baghdad. The mortars landed in a nearby neighborhood, wounding five civilians and killing eight others. Government buildings in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) perpetrated an attack in a market.  The motivation is unknown.  Two police officers were killed and three civilians were wounded (including one minor).  The perpetrators also stole police weapons.
Anil Pandey, a leader in the Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha, was shot and killed by members of the Communist Party of India-Maoists (CPI-Maoist)  at Mohala village in the Rajnandgaon district.
A police station in Bannang Sata was attacked by militants.  The incident occurred the same night that militants fired on government buildings and set fire to state property.  In total, two people were killed, including a police officer, and extensive damage was caused.  Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra was visiting southern Thailand (Narathiwat province) when the attacks occurred.
A woman was injured in a bomb attack on the offices of a Hong Kong newspaper.  A small gift box sent to the Ming Pao Daily News editor-in-chief Cheung Kin-por exploded when his secretary opened it on the afternoon of 7 November 2005.  The device was accompanied by a letter denouncing the newspaper for unspecified activities the month before,  demanding a $30 million donation within three days to the Communist Chest, and threatening additional attacks if the paper continued its current reporting.
Gunmen opened fire on a police patrol in Baqubah, killing one police officer and wounding five others. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
Captain Abd Salim, the deputy chief of the Al-Azamiyah Police Center in northern Baghdad, was killed by unknown gunmen who opened fire on him as he drove to work. Police officials are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
20 members of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), 25th Front, bombed the entrance to a new police station, still under construction.  The men were carrying rifles.  Once inside, they detonated an explosive device and destroyed the police station.  The attack also caused damage to surrounding buildings.
A bomb was removed from a shopping center in Los Palos Grandes before it could explode.  The perpetrator and motive are unknown. However, the elections are coming up and the authorities have quoted it as a possible motivation.  There were no casualties or fatalities reported.  It is unclear as to whether there is a connection, but there were two bombs that exploded in Chuao and Las Mercedes on the same day.
A Sudanese administrative attache who worked as a driver  for the Sudanese embassy in Baghdad was assassinated when gunmen opened fire on him in Baghdad as he left the Palestinian mission. The man was identified as Hummoda Ahmed Adam, a Sudanese citizen. The attack is the latest in a string of attacks targeting diplomats in Iraq.
A suicide bomber attacked the Radisson SAS hotel in Amman as part of a coordinated attack on three western hotel chains that killed 63 people (including three perpetrators) and wounded more than one hundred.  The Associate Press reported that this particular attack  killed more than thirty.  The assailant detonated his device in the middle of a wedding party taking place in one of the hotel's banquet halls.  The bomber entered the hotel with his wife, who was also wearing an explosive device and  prepared to act as a suicide bomber.  Her explosives did not go off, however, and she fled the scene.  Sajida Mubarak Atrous al-Rishawi returned to the apartment she and the other three suicide bombers had rented and then traveled to the Jordanian city of Salt where she has relatives.  Authorities captured her and  she made a full confession on Jordanian television. Al Qaeda in Iraq, led by Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, claimed responsibility for the attack.  All three suicide bombers, and the woman whose device failed, were Iraqi.  The Radisson SAS in Amman has been a target of Al Qaeda and Zarqawi in the past.  Casualty numbers are for all three attacks combined.On 21 September 2006, the State Security Court in Jordan sentenced Sajida Mubarak Atrous al-Rishawi to death by hanging.  Six other Iraqis were also sentenced to death in absentia.  The seven were charged with conspiracy to carry out terrorist acts by using explosives that caused the death of an individual, the partial destruction of a building with people inside, and possessing explosives without a legal license with illicit intent.  The verdict can be appealed.  Abu Musab al-Zarqawi had originally been named in the case, however charges against him were dropped after his death in a US airstrike near Baqubah, Iraq in June 2006.
In the Chavakachcheri area, suspected members of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) robbed two postmen as they were delivering voter cards for the November 17 Presidential election.  The thieves got away with 259 vote cards.
Assailants threw a bomb at a group of teachers in Sungai Padi district.  The teachers fired back, but no one was injured or killed.
A suicide car bomber detonated his vehicle outside an army recruiting and medical center in Tikrit where army recruits were being given medical checks. The recruits were former officers in the Iraqi army under Saddam Hussein who had been invited to rejoin the military. The attack killed seven people and wounded 13. Recruits were among the dead and injured. Attacks on army and police recruits are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on a group of police officers in civilian clothing in Mosul, killing one policewoman and wounding two other officers, a man and a woman. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
Suspected Taliban militants attacked Nimroz Province Deputy Governor Nematollah Yosufzai on the Kandahar-Kabul highway outside Qalat, killing him on his way to a conference on strengthening peace in Kabul.  Taliban spokesman Qari Mohammad Yusof claimed responsibility for the attacks on behalf of the group.
On November 10, a grenade was thrown onto the property of a lodge owned by Jaffna Tamil National Alliance Member of Parliament, Suresh Premachandran, but no casualties were reported.  The lodge is located in the Kattaipirai area of Jaffna district and the perpetrators remain unknown.
Gunmen opened fire on the compound of the Embassy of Oman in Baghdad, killing two people, including an Iraqi policeman and a Sudanese embassy employee, and wounding four others, at least two of whom were policemen. The attack is the second on employees of Arab embassies in the past week. Diplomats, particularly those from Arab countries working in Iraq with the new Iraqi government, are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
On November 11, ex-district chief Abdul Hakim Khan was shot and killed by suspected Taliban gunmen who entered a mosque in Helmand Province and attacked him while he was at prayer.  The assailants were able to escape on motorbikes.
After attending a public grievances redressal camp, a team of government officials came under attack by members of the Communist Party of India-Maoists (CPI-Maoist).  The team included Bastar Development Authority Chairman, Vikram Usendi, a Bharatiya Janata Party legislator representing Narayanpur Assembly segment, and District Collector S. K. Raju, among others.  One person was killed and five others were injured in the attack.
Gunmen attacked a police patrol in Kirkuk with gunfire, killing one policeman and wounded one other. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
Eelam People Democratic Party member Vellaipodi Rasanayagam was shot and killed by unidentified attackers in the Wellawatte area of Colombo.
Unknown perpetrators carried out a bomb attack on a business in Bogot. One girl died and five people (including 2 children) were injured.  No motivation has been established for this attack.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol in Saydida, killing one policeman and wounding three others. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
Two suicide bombers detonated their explosives within 90 minutes and a few hundred meters of each other outside the offices of an election oversight body in Kabul.  In the first explosion, one German International Security Assistance Force soldier and one civilian was killed.   The Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack.
Unknown perpetrators bombed electrical towers in Cali.  Two were destroyed and a third was damaged.  RCN Radio claims that there were three additional bombs deactivated.  There were no reports of casualties or injuries.The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) were implicated by the Police (El Pais, 16 November)
Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) insurgents abducted three students and three teachers in Khotang district.Note: Incident date approximate.
A car bomb exploded in Baghdad, near a group of police officers gathered for a meeting near a restaurant frequented by Iraqi police. The attack killed four people including two police officers and wounded seven, including six police officers. The attack also resulted in the destruction of several police and civilian vehicles and nearby shops. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
A rocket fired from the Bagrami hills in Kabul landed in the Shashdarak neighborhood, which houses the offices of several foreign NGOs and the Afghanistan International Chamber of Commerce (AICC).  The rocket damaged the power generator of private company North Ariana.  Police officials believe that the rocket could have been targeted for the nearby US embassy.
A car bomb explosion in front of a KFC restaurant in Karachi killed at least three people and injured 20, including two South African women, on November 15.  According to police, the explosion  was caused by 5 kilogram improvised explosive device that was placed in a car parked outside the restaurant.  The resulting blast left a hole four feet wide and half a foot deep, damaging a Muslim Commercial Bank, a wing of the PIDC house, and the outer portion of the KFC.  A spokesman for the Balochistan Liberation Army, identified as Chakar Azam, claimed responsibility for the car bomb on behalf of his organization.  According to Azam, the bomb was detonated as a form of protest, to put pressure on the government to provide greater rights for the Baloch people.
A Chinese construction company building a road to link Gwadar and the Turbat area of Makran came under rocket attack in the Tallar area of Gwadar district on November 15.  Five rockets were fired from the nearby Dahram mountain range toward the company's camp site by unknown assailants.  Two of the rockets exploded in the camp's parking area, destroying many vehicles but causing no injuries.  The remaining three rockets landed in open areas near the camp.
An explosive device detonated in front of a building which houses a Muslim prayer room and mosque in the 17th district of Vienna.  The blast damaged nearby vehicles, shattered windows and damaged the front door of the building.  The attack took place as a conference on Islam was held in downtown Vienna.
A roadside bomb exploded near the convoy of the police director of Baiji, Col. Mohammed Saleh, in Bayji. Saleh and four of his bodyguards were injured in the attack. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
A bomb exploded under a Kosovo Police Service (ShPK) police car parked next to the Youth and Sports Center in Pristina without injury.  The bomb was detonated as the driver put the car in reverse.  The device apparently contained enough explosive power to kill one person.  NOTE: It is unclear if the police car or the Youth and Sports Center was the target.
Two children who had been kidnapped from the Bhimad bazaar on November 16 by members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M) are reported to have been tortured by the Maoists for a week before being released.  The two children, Netra Kumal and Jhak Bahadur, were accused of being spies.
Four gunmen stormed the clinic of Dr. Kadhim Abbood Alwash in Baghdad and killed him. Alwash was the head of the Karama General Hospital in Baghdad.
Two civilians were injured at a vote counting center at Batticaloa Hindu College when unidentified attackers threw a hand grenade toward them.
New People's Army (NPA) members opened fire on a checkpoint while the police officers manning the post were taking shelter from the rain in a shed.  Simeon Santiago was killed while three other offices and two civilians were injured.
A bomb exploded near a bank in the Iraqi town of Khanaqin. No casualties were reported in the blast. The attack occurred on the same day and only a short time after  two suicide bombers detonated their explosives inside Shiite mosques, killing 77 and wounding over 80. It was unclear if this blast was linked to the suicide bombings.
Lord's Resistance Army rebels attacked a truck traveling between Patongo and Adilang.  The attack resulted in the death of five people.  An unknown number of people are either missing and injured.
In Tlalnepantla, authorities are investigating an attack against a BBVA-Bancomer bank ATM. The Spanish owned bank was damaged when an unknown group detonated explosives.  There were no casualties at the scene.A little known organization, Mexico United Against Poverty was responsible for detonating explosives at another BBVA-Bancomer bank  in Atizapan the same day.   There were leaflets left at the scene in Atizapan with anti FTAA rhetoric like, to hell with the FTAA, and proletariat, awake. In Tlalnepantla, the authorities were investigating whether the same group had carried out the attack.
Gunmen attacked and killed four members of the banned Ba'ath party in Karbala. Members of the Ba'ath party and former members of Saddam Hussein's regime are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
A Sunni Kurd cleric, Sheik Bashir Hadi Fakhreddine, the Imam of the Bilal al-Habashi mosque in Kirkuk, was kidnapped by unknown gunmen as he traveled to Bahrain where he planned to represent Iraq in an Islamic conference. Fakhreddines friend Seif Abdullah and a member of the Iraqi Islamic Party were also kidnapped at the same time. The bodies of Fakhreddine, Abdullah, and the Iraqi Islamic Party member were found near Baghdad with bullet wounds and marks of torture about 10 days after the kidnapping. Attacks on Sunni and Kurdish clerics are frequent in Iraq.NOTE: Kidnapping date is approximate.
Two policeman were killed by members of the New People's Army (NPA) in an ambush in North Poblacion, Bucay.
Police discovered and defused a sound bomb that had been placed in a fruit can and left outside a bank branch in Ankara.  Police safely detonated the device, but some windows in nearby shops were shattered during the explosion.  No group has claimed responsibility for the attack.
Three bombs exploded in the center of Travnik early in the morning.  The bombs were placed on Ulica Sehida and Bosanska Ulica and there were no injuries, but a substantial amount of property damage occurred.
Gunmen killed a police officer when they opened fire on him in Baghdad. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
Two rockets landed around the Khak-e-Afhan district headquarters within a few hours of each other, killing two civilians and injuring four.  Police are invesatigating but have no suspectes at this time.
Two cars carrying regional staffers of the Internal Affairs Department were hit by the explosion from a homemade bomb as they were driving outside the village of Sheripovo in Shatoyskiy region.  The incident precedes the start of preliminary parliamentary elections in Chechnya.
A remotely-detonated roadside bomb exploded near a convoy transporting US embassy staff and Izaddin al-Mohammedi, the chairman of the board of directors of the Independent Electoral Commission of Iraq. One of the US military escort vehicles was damaged in the attack, but no one was injured. The attack occurred on the road to Baqubah, where Mohammedi was to attend a meeting with local political leaders. Attacks on Iraqi government officials and persons affiliated with the US occupation in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
Gunmen kidnapped and killed a Kurdish election volunteer in Mosul. Miqdad Ahmed Sito, who worked for the Organization for Development and Democratic Dialogue, was kidnapped in the Shifaa neighborhood; his dead body was found several days later in the same area. The attack was claimed by the al-Qaeda linked group, Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn.NOTE: Attack date is date body was found.
Gunmen in Iraqi Army uniforms broke into the home of a senior Sunni tribal leader in Baghdad, Khadim Sarhid Ali al-Hemaiyem, and killed him, along with three of his sons and his son-in-law. Hemaiyem was the leader of the Sunni Batta tribe and was also the brother of one of the candidates in the upcoming December 15 election.  One of Hemaiyem's sons was killed about one month ago. The attack was likely motivated by sectarian tensions.
Gunmen in Baqubah killed Col. Mohammed Jassim who served in the former Iraqi army. Former members of the Iraqi Army are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
On the night of November 23, two bombs exploded in front of two mosques in Kushtia.  The first bomb went off in front of Shahi Mosque, however no injuries were reported in the incident.
An explosive device made up of 500g of TNT was found on a railway crossing in Samashki. It was safely defused.
Adnan Khahtan al-Jarah, a member of the Iraqi National Accord Party (the party chaired by former Prime Minister Ayad Allawi) was killed by unknown gunmen. Those who participate in politics are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
Gunmen ambushed a police patrol in Baghdad, killing four police officers. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
Gunmen attacked Kasim Talal Husayn, assistant to the dean of the Education Faculty at Al-Mustansiriyah University, when they opened fire on his car in Baghdad. Husayn and his driver were killed in the attack. Teachers and those who work at educational institutions are the increasingly frequent target of insurgent attacks in Iraq.
Two Road Transport Corporation buses in Visakhapatnam district were damaged by members of the Communist Party of India-Maoist (CPI-Maoist) on November 24.  No casualties were reported.
A member of the Sunni Association of Muslim Scholars and Imam of the al-Ishra Mosque, Sheikh Nadir Jameel, was kidnapped and killed by unknown gunmen in Basra. His body was found several hours after he was kidnapped.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), 30th Front, called Caracol radio station to claim an attack on two electrical pylons that left 600,000 people without electricity.  The FARC caller, JJ, indicated that the attack was in response to President Uribe's policies.  The group also claimed a boat bombing attack.
A roadside bomb linked to a 100 meter cable that led into the woods was detonated, injuring four soldiers guarding school teachers.
A remotely detonated car bomb exploded near two buses carrying foreigners in Baghdad. The attack killed four Iraqis and wounded five others. None of the foreigners were killed or injured in the blast. Convoys carrying foreign workers and diplomats are the frequent target of attack in Iraq.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC)  bombed (using Pentolite) the auditorium of Florencia's main hospital where municipal councilors were meeting with labor leaders of the National Association of Hospital Workers from El Paujil, San Vincente del Caguan, Puerto Rico, and El Doncello Municipalities for the reorganization of the health services in Caqueta department.  Journalists and municipal councilors from Puerto Rico were among the injured.  39 people were injured and 1 person was killed.  As a precaution, Amazonas University and the Palace of Justice were evacuated.Other Sources: La Nacion, 27 November
Gunmen attacked a police patrol in Baghdad with gunfire, killing one policeman and wounding two others. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
Gunmen killed Jassim Hassoun of the major crimes police force in Karbala, near his home. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
Israeli Defense Forces found and defused a large explosive charge near the border fence in the Gaza Strip.
An unknown group  blew up an Ecopetrol gas pipeline, leaving residents without gas service.  There were no casualties reported.
Several mortars were fired at the Green Zone in Baghdad. No one was injured in the attack and no damage was reported. Insurgents frequently target the Green Zone which houses government buildings and US headquarters.
Two Iraqi policemen were killed in Baghdad  when a roadside bomb exploded near them as they were investigating a shooting attack that killed three members of the Iraqi National Bloc Party. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
Unknown gunmen opened fire on a vehicle carrying employees of the al-Iraqiyah Television Station, a state-run TV channel. The attack occurred in Baghdad and resulted in the death of two employees and the injury of six others. Media employees are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
Militants fired a qassam rocket at Israeli territory in the Negev, close to the southern Gaza security fence.  Authorities suspect the rocket was fired from the Khan Yunus area.  No damage or injuries were reported.
A senior Sunni cleric who had made contacts with the Americans during the 2004 siege of Fallujah (but later severed contacts with the Americans) and had encouraged participation in the political process, Sheikh Hamza Abbas al-Esawwi, was assassinated by gunmen who opened fire on him in the Anbar province as he left a mosque where he was leading evening prayers. Those who encourage participation in or participate in politics are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
Ghalid al-Ubaydi, a candidate in the upcoming December 15 elections for the Iraqi Front for National Dialogue, was assassinated by gunmen who opened fire on him in Baghdad. Political figures are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
A number of SUVs and other luxury cars were set on fire at two car dealerships in Pacific Beach, California.  Three Armadas were completely destroyed and minor damage was caused to another two vehicles.  Police are blaming members of the Earth Liberation Front (ELF) for perpetrating this attack and several other arson attacks in the surrounding areas.
Armed gunmen opened fire on a minibus carrying construction workers, killing nine and wounding two. The attack occurred near Baqubah. The attack may have had sectarian motives, but may also have targeted the construction workers for their role in supporting Iraqi reconstruction.
Members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists kidnapped a Nepali Congress member, identified as Laxmi Narayan Chowdhary, from Kailali.Note: Incident date is approximate.
Unknown gunmen in Iraqi Army uniforms attacked the home of two brothers who work on the Independent Electoral Commission of Iraq in al-Zaghamiya, near Baqubah. Majid Jabar Brisem al-Hamdani, also  the imam of the Al-Kawthar, was killed in the attack and Hamed Jabbar al-Hamdani, the head of the al-Zaghamiya election center, was wounded in the attack. Attacks on those who participate in the political process are frequent in Iraq.
A man identified as Abdur Razzak, claiming to be a member of Jamatul Mujahedin Bangladesh (JMB), was disguised as a tea-vendor when he detonated a suicide bomb in front of the Deputy Commissioner's office in Gazipur district.  The explosion killed one government employee and injured 30 others, including the suicide bomber.  Police arrested the man immediately.
A Qassam rocket was fired on Israeli territory.  Israeli Defense Forces responded by firing on the area from where the rocket was launched.  The source did not mention injuries or damage.
Sylhet Mayor Badruddin Ahmed Kamran survived a grenade attack on December 2 while giving a speech near Tilagar Jame Mosque.  Unidentified attackers threw a grenade at the Mayor, but the device did not explode.
Armed men in Tuz Khormato attacked the Advisory Council building in the city, first killing the guard and then detonating an explosive device inside the building. Municipal buildings are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
Two rockets were fired on the Carmilla (Karmiyya) kibbutz, south of the town of Askelon and in the village of Nativ Ha'asara.  No damage or injurites were reported.  The Israeli Defense Forces responded early morning 4 December with four missile strikes against targets in Gaza City where the rockets were thought to have been fired from.
Gunmen killed Iraqi police Lt. Col. Abdul Razzaq Abdul Latif, a high ranking officer in the Baghdad police's major criminal unit, when they opened fire on him as he drove to work in Baghdad. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
A car bomb exploded near a police patrol in Al-Tahrir Square in Baghdad, killing three civilians and wounding 26 others. No police were injured in the attack. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
Lieutenant Shamil Khadisov, an officer of the first patrol police headquarters of the Interior Ministry was found dead in Grozny's Staropromyslovskiy district with gunshot wounds.
Gunmen abducted a French engineer, Bernard Planche, in Baghdad as he was on his way to work at the Risafa Water Plant. Planche is the head of the mission for AACCESS NGO, a group that works on US-funded water projects. Witnesses said that armed men in three cars surrounded Planche as he tried to get into his car in the Mansour district of Baghdad and beat him as they forced him into their vehicle. Blood was found near the site of the attack, indicating that Planche may have been injured. Planche is the sixth foreigner to be kidnapped in Iraq in a week's time.On Wednesday December 28, the kidnappers released a video showing Planche. In the video, the kidnappers denounced the illegal French presence in Iraq and identified themselves as the Battalion of the Look-out for Iraq group. The kidnappers demanded that French troops leave the country, although French troops were never sent to Iraq. The kidnappers also threatened to kill Planche. Planche identified himself in the video and apologized for the problems he had caused for those who tried to help him and to his family.On January 7, 2006, Planche escaped from his captors by climbing through the window of the farmhouse where he was being held after his captor fled the farmhouse to escape US and Iraqi troops who were conducting a search of the area.  Planche was unharmed except for a broken nose that he sustained during the kidnapping.Several sources reported that Planche had provided some services to the French intelligence agencies during his stay in Iraq. Officials believe his kidnapping was premeditated and may have been linked to his connection with French intelligence services. The kidnappers could have been referring to the presence of intelligence officials when they demanded that the French end their illegitimate presence in Iraq.
Two explosions in Herat did not cause any property damage or injuries, while a third bomb was recovered by the police before it could explode.  The first explosion occurred outside the home of former Ingil District Chief, Said Ahmad Qitali at 10:00 p.m. Note: Incident date is approximate
Members of the National Socialist Council of Khaplang attacked and killed a member of the rival National Socialist Council of Nagaland-Isak-Muivah (NSCN-IM) in the Athibung area of Peren.
A senior Interior Ministry police officer, Brigadier General Hamza Hussein Fadhil was killed by gunmen who opened fire on him. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
Two high ranking employees of the city of Tikrit, including the director of the Tikrit municipality Wali Mohsen, were killed by unknown gunmen who opened fire on them. Government employees are the frequent target of insurgent attack.The attack was claimed by the Ansar al-Sunnah Army.
Insurgents attacked the premises an Interior Ministry Rapid Intervention unit in downtown Baqubah, detonating two explosive devices near the building as reinforcements arrived. Several police were injured, including the commander of the Al-Walid regiment. No exact casualty numbers were given.
Five explosive devices detonated on roads in Madrid, causing no injuries.  One of these explosions took place on the M-40 road, where traffic was halted.  A member of the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) called in a warning of all five devices prior to their detonation.  On 28 December, ETA officially claimed responsibility for twenty-one attacks in the region, including claiming all five explosions on the Madrid roads.
Suspected members of the Baloch Liberation Army planted a series of bombs along a railway track in the Sariab area outside of Quetta.  When the explosives detonated, the track was damaged but no casualties were reported.  The track was repaired in three hours, delaying a freight train but not affecting any passenger trains.
Gunmen in Baghdad opened fire on several Iraqi election campaign workers and employees of an advertising company who were hanging campaign advertisements for one of the electoral lists in the upcoming December 15 elections. One worker was killed and three wounded in the attack. Attack on those who assist in elections and the political process are frequent in Iraq.
Members of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) threw a hand grenade in Vavuniya, killing one civilian and injuring eight others, including a Sri Lankan Army soldier.
A candidate for the Iraqi National List Party, Abd-al-Salam Qasm al-Furayji, was killed by unknown gunmen who opened fire on him in Baghdad as he drove his car. The attack comes one week before the December 15 election in which al-Furayji was running. Those who participate in politics are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
Mortar shells were fired on Israeli territory in the Southwest Negev.  No damage or injuries were reported.  Israeli Defense Forces responded by firing on targets in the northern Gaza Strip.
A freight train traveling from Mineralnye Vody to Makhachkala was bombed four kilometers from Khasavyurt.  There were no casualties, but one car went off the tracks and damaged two meters of railway.
An explosive device detonated near a police patrol on the road between Baqubah and Buhruz. One civilian car was damaged, but no casualties were reported. Attacks on police in Iraq are frequent.
An explosive device detonated near a police patrol at the entrance to Diyala University, south of Baqubah. No injuries were reported in the attack. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
Unknown gunmen open fire on the Palestinian Preventive Security Services (PPSS) office in Rafah and the Tal al-Sultan police station causing damage to both buildings and injuring a police officer.
A tribal man named Ganapathi was killed by members of the  Communist Party of India-Maoists (CPI-Maoist) in the Utnoor division of Adilabad district.  The CPI-Maoists reportedly believed Ganapathi to be a police informer.
Gunmen opened fire on a mosque in the Al-Saydiya neighborhood of Baghdad, wounding one mosque guard.
A 20-year-old Palestinian man was arrested south of Jerusalem for carrying two improvised explosive devices.  He told investigators that he was planning to carry out a terrorist attack inside Jerusalem.
The son of the former governor of the Salaheddin province, Nahed al-Khatib, was killed by unknown gunmen in the processing plant that he owns near Tikrit. Al-Khatib's father was a member of the clan of Saddam Hussein.  His father and brother were killed when U.S. forces took control of the Salaheddin city of Tikrit in 2003.
An explosive device detonated at a post office in Igorre, in Vizcaya province, causing serious damage to the premises.  Post offices are often targeted by Basque separatists in this region.  On 28 December, the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) claimed responsibility for twenty-one attacks in the region between 25 October and 21 December.  In their statement of claim, the group admits to targeting four post offices, including this one.
Gunmen in Baghdad ambushed a police patrol, leading to a gun battle in which two police officers were killed and nine others wounded. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded on a minibus that was parked at a police checkpoint outside a police headquarters in Baghdad, killing three Iraqi civilians and wounding 13 people, including five policemen.  The bus was empty at the time of the explosion. The driver of the bus was among the injured civilians.
A car bomb exploded near the Al-Nahrawan police checkpoint injuring three people. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
Eelam People's Democratic Party activist Michael Collin was shot and killed by members of the  Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) on the main road from Trincomalee to Nilaveli in Uppuveli.
Gunmen assassinated a Sunni Arab election candidate, Muzhir al-Dulami, as he was campaigning for his Free Progressive Party in Ramadi on the final day of campaigning before the December 15 parliamentary election.  The attack also wounded three of his bodyguards. Politicians in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
The Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) rebels ambushed a vehicle on its way from Lira Town to Omoro on 13 December.  The attack resulted in the death of eight civilians and an unspecified number of injuries.
A roadside bomb detonated near a police patrol in Mosul, killing two police officers and wounding three others. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
A Qassam rocket fired at Israeli territory hit a Palestinian's home in the northern Gaza Strip.  No injuries were reported.
The Interior Ministry reported that a suspected suicide bomber killed himself in an explosion in Mazar-e-Sharif on Wednesday, though no one else was injured in the explosion.  The bomber detonated his explosives near the Hazrat Ali shrine in the city center.
Unknown perpetrators attacked a police truck that was traveling from Mercaderes to San Joaquin with bombs and rifles.  One police officer died and a second was injured.  The motive for the attack is not clear.
A mortar shell was fired at a crowd of people standing outside a polling center in Tal Afar on the day of the December 15 parliamentary election. The attack killed one civilian and wounded two others.
A mortar round was fired at a polling station in Tikrit on the day of the December 15 parliamentary elections. No one was injured in the attack.
Militants fired a rocket on Israeli territory north of the Gaza Strip.  No damage or injuries were reported.
A roadside bomb exploded near a polling station for the December 15 elections in Baqubah, killing an Iraqi police officer and injuring three others.
A fire bomb was thrown at a building housing the True Path Party (DYP) in Mamara, in Bursa province.  The blast caused a fire in the building, which fire officers were able to extinguish it.  One person was arrested in connection with this attack.
According to the Israeli newspaper Ma'ariv, a report was released stating that Islamic Jihad fired a rocket from Janin toward Israeli territory.  The rocket reportedly launched, however hit the earth shortly after being fired.  No injuries or damage were reported.  The article did not mention the source of the report.NOTE: Incident date is approximate.
Several mortars were fired at a school in Baghdad that was a polling station in the December 15 parliamentary elections, on December 16, the day after the election. The attack killed four children and a US Marine and injured two other children.
On December 16, a grenade landed near the residence of Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council Executive Member, Pradip Singer, but failed to explode.  It is not known who threw the grenade
The vehicle of Sahib al-Shibli, a Sunni candidate in the December 15 parliamentary elections from the National Dialogue Front party, was attacked by gunmen in Diwaniya when gunmen opened fire on his vehicle. Shibli was not injured in the attack, although one of his bodyguards was killed and another wounded. The attack comes only several days after the election. Politicians in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
Gunmen attacked a police patrol in Kirkuk, killing one police officer and wounding another. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
A low-powered explosive device that had been left in a bag detonated at the Esenler Head Official's office.  The device was weak and no casualties were caused.  No further information is available.
A teacher was abducted from Phulbari village in the Dang district by members of the Communist Party of India-Maoists on December 17.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) blew up two bridges in the Municipalities of El Tarra and Tibu.  There were no fatalities or injuries reported.On the same day, but not necessarily in coordination, there were FARC attacks in Norte de Santander department on electricity pylons and oil pipelines.
A police informant was shot and wounded while returning from evening prayers in Yaha, Yala.
A roadside bomb detonated near a police patrol as it passed Al-Mustansiriyah University in Baghdad. Three policemen were killed and two wounded in the attack. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
A driver for the Interior Ministry was killed when gunmen opened fire on him in Baghdad. Government employees are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on several police officers in a barber shop in Balad Ruz, killing two officers and one civilian. Barber shops are the frequent target of attack by insurgent groups that feel that western style haircuts violate Islamic laws. Police are also the frequent target of attack.
Godae Malee, an assistant village headman, was shot several times and severely injured by two men on a motorcycle while returning from market in Yala's Raman District.
Unknown gunmen opened fire at the convoy of Baghdad's deputy governor, Ziyad Ali al-Zawbai, in Baghdad. Al-Zawbai was injured in the attack, along with three of his bodyguards. Three civilians were killed in the attack. Government officials are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
The office of the Iraqi Turkoman Front office in Kirkuk was attacked by gunfire. The attack wounded four security guards at the building and caused significant material damage to the building.
Two policemen were shot and killed by unknown gunmen in Baqubah who blocked the path of their vehicle and then opened fire on them. Attacks on police in Iraq are frequent.
Unknown perpetrators attacked Arauca Governor Julio Acosta Bernal.  Governor Acosta was passing by El Alcaravan farm in his convoy when a car bomb was detonated.  The governor's car was destroyed, but he survived. No fatalities were reported.  The press reported that this was the eighth assassination attempt in Acosta's fifteen year career in politics.
Gunmen attacked a bus carrying construction workers who work on a US base, killing one person and wounding six others. The attack occurred in Baqubah. Attacks on those who work for US and Iraqi forces are frequent in Iraq.
Three men, including two local tribesman and one Afghan refugee, were killed when unidentified gunmen opened fire on a barber shop in Wana on 21 December.  All barber shops in the area had previously received warnings to stop shaving beards.
Unidentified assailants planted bombs at the base of two 33-KV electrical towers in the Barkhan area.  The electric supply was suspended due to the attacks.
An explosive device was detonated near a police patrol in Samarra, killing three police officers and wounding four others. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
A portion of railway track in Balochistan was blown up by unidentified militants on December 23.  A train taking railway officials from Quetta to Zahidan narrowly avoided the damaged section of track.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol on the road between Iskandariya and Latifiya. The attack killed one police officer and wounded two others. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
Three schools were set on fire by unidentified armed men in Ghazni and Kandahar provinces.  One secondary school was set on fire in the Chalghor area of Panjwai district on December 23, damaging most of the building and its contents.   Police have arrested eight suspected Taliban insurgents  in connection with the incidents.
Unidentified assailants exploded a bomb near a power pylon in the tribal area of Dera Ghazi Khan, damaging the main power line supplying Balochistan.  Note: Incident date is approximate.
Armed men opened fire on a car carrying employees of the Health Ministry in Baghdad. The attack killed three of the Health Ministry employees. Attacks on government employees are frequent in Iraq.
Unknown perpetrators attacked city officials attending a Christmas Eve celebration at Villagarzon city hall.  The grenade attack injured twelve. No fatalities were reported.  The press reported that both the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) and the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) operate in the region.  The perpetrators have not yet been identified.
Police Lt. Col. Fawzi Ali Uklaa was killed when a roadside bomb detonated near his vehicle as he was getting out of it in Mosul. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
Two car bombs exploded in Baghdad near a group of Iraqi secret service members, wounding seven of them. Attacks on government employees and security personnel are frequent in Iraq.
A car bomb targeting a police patrol exploded near a Baghdad shopping district, wounding six people, including a police commando. The attack was one of four car bombs that targeted police patrols in Baghdad on this day. In total, the attacks killed at least five and wounded at least 20. Attacks on police in Iraq are frequent.
Gunmen stormed a Shiite poultry farm in Al-Mahaweel, killing four Shiite residents. The note left next to the bodies said the victims deserved to die because they were Shiites and noted that they cooperated with US forces.
A motorbike loaded with explosives detonated in a Shiite area of Baghdad, killing three people and wounding 26 others. The attack occurred on a day of increased violence in Baghdad.
An Iraqi police officer was killed by unknown gunmen who opened fire on him in Baghdad. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
Gunmen attacked a group of police officers who responded to an earlier attack on a private home in Baghdad which left three citizens dead. When police arrived to remove the dead bodies gunmen attacked the house, wounding two police officers.
The motorcade of Hamad Humud al-Qaysi, the governor of Salah al-Din governorate, was attacked when an explosive charge detonated near the motorcade in Baghdad. No injuries were reported. Government officials are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
An unidentified man approached a Central Command and Adana Court carrying a suspicious package.  When police intercepted the attacker, he dropped his bag and ran from the scene.  The bag contained explosives placed inside a book and a mobile phone mechanism.  Police were able to safely defuse the bomb.
On December 26, an improvised explosive device knocked a vehicle carrying three Wana government officials off the road in the North West Frontier Province.  The explosion occurred in the Himmat area, where Wisal Muhammad and two other officials were being driven to Dera Ismail Khan City.
Two rockets were fired on the Negev, however caused no reported damage or injuries.  One rocket landed in a playground inside a kibbutz; the other landed near the city of Ashqelon.
An Interior Ministry official was killed by gunmen in Baghdad. Government employees are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
A roadside bomb detonated near a police patrol in Al-Mahaweel, killing two policemen and injuring three more. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
On December 27, an eight inch hole was blown into the pipeline that carries gas to the main purification plant in the Sui gas field, causing the damaged pipeline to catch on fire.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, wounding two police officers. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
An unidentified person threw a hand grenade into a girls' high school in Kandahar.  Although no casualties were reported, several windows and a wall were damaged in the explosion.  The school is located in the Mirwais Mina area of the city.
The Popular Resistance Committees and Ahmed Abul Reesh Brigades, an offshoot of Fatah, fired missiles at the Sofa crossing point.  No damage or injuries were reported.
Singchai Salae, the assistant chief of Tanyoug Limoh village, was attacked with M-16 assault rifles while riding home on his motorcycle; he suffered severe gunshot wounds.
Twelve Iraqi Shiites, members of an extended family, were kidnapped from their home near Latifiya, put into a minivan, and then shot. Sectarian violence is frequent in Iraq.
A Lebanese engineer was kidnapped in Iraq. The man was identified as Assad Hussein Younis. Foreign nationals working in Iraq, particularly on reconstruction projects, are the frequent target of insurgent attack. Younis was released on December 29, 2005. NOTE: Attack date unknown. Date listed is date of release.
Three people were injured on December 29 when unidentified assailants threw a grenade into a barber shop in Balochistan.  Establishments that cut mens' hair are frequently targeted by militants.
Carlos Arciniegas Nino, leader of a Communist party and president of several labor unions, disappeared on 29 December after receiving several death threats from paramilitary groups.  Arciniegas was found in the Sogamoso River (Puerto Wilches) on 4 January, having been tortured and shot to death.  The perpetrator is still unknown.
Nine people were gunned down in Baghdad by gunmen who targeted them because they were drinking alcohol, which is against Islamic custom and law. Attacks on those who break Islamic custom by buying or selling alcohol are frequent in Iraq.
Power supply to Vinder, Uthal, and Bela was interrupted when a bomb explosion damaged the KESC Hub Chowki Grid Station in Balochistan, however no injuries were reported.Note: Incident date approximate.
A bomb exploded near a patrol of Interior Ministry commandos in Baghdad, wounding four commandos. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
Two Molotov cocktails were thrown at the Civil Guard barracks in Sanguesa by three unidentified youths.  One of the devices blackened the front wall of the building, but there were no reported injuries.
On December 31, unidentified gunmen entered the home of People's Democratic Party activist Mukhtar Ahmed Wani, shooting and killing him and injuring his relative, identified as Manzoor Ahmed in Pulwama district.
A bomb ripped through a Christian market stall selling pork, which was packed with New Year's Eve customers. The bombing occurred in the religiously-divided Central Sulawesi Province. Seven were killed, including the couple who ran the kiosk; forty-eight were injured.
A explosive device detonated near a resturant in Baghdad. This was one of 13 bombs detonated in Baghdad on this day. The attacks wounded 20 people in total, although casualty numbers for this specific attack were not given.
A bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, wounding two policemen. This was one of 13 bombs that exploded in Baghdad on this day, wounding 20 people total.
Militants entered a club for United Nations workers in Gaza City, tied up a security guard, and detonated explosives, damaging a bar of the building.  The club is only open to foreigners and is one of the few establishments that serves alcohol.  No injuries were reported.  The Gaza Strip has seen increased violence in the run-up to the 25 January parliamentary elections.
Three explosive devices were detonated under an electrical power line in Baiji. The explosion damaged the power line and one of the power towers and resulted in reduced power supply to Baghdad. Attacks on utilities are frequent in Iraq. Gunmen attack utilities to undermine the new Iraqi government.
The Turkish ambassador to Iraq, Unal Cevikoz, was the target of an assassination attempt when 15 to 20 gunmen attacked his convoy as he left the Um al-Qura Mosque in Baghdad after meeting with Sheikh Harith al-Dhari, the head of the Association of Muslim scholars in Iraq. Cevikoz was slightly injured in the attack. Attacks on foreign diplomats are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded near an Iraqi police patrol in Baghdad. Although several civilians and police were injured in the attack, exact numbers were not given. Attacks on police in Iraq are frequent.
Following the withdrawal of a cease-fire agreement between the Communist Party of Nepal Maoists and the Royal Nepalese Army on January 2, unidentified assailants were able to bypass a guard at the ward No. 5 office in Butwal and detonate a bomb.  No casualties were reported in the incident.
A rocket attack by unidentified assailants caused damage to a water plant at the Loti gas field in Dera Bugti district on January 2.  According to officials, if the water tank is not repaired within three days, the gas supply could be interrupted.
A very weak explosive device was thrown at the Albanian embassy in Belgrade, causing minor damage to the building and no injuries.
Ahmed al-Bakka, the leader of the Dawa party (headed by Prime Minister Jaafari) in Muqdadiyah, was the target of an assassination attempt when gunmen attacked him. Al-Bakka was not injured in the attack, but his nephew was killed. Attacks on political figures are frequent in Iraq.
Four workers from the Algerian Water Company were ambushed on a road near the Derdour Dam in Theniat El Had.  Rebels fired into the vehicle, killing all four men inside.  The attack may be an attempt to derail the ongoing  reconciliation process between the government and  terrorist elements in Algeria.
On January 3, suspected members of the Communist Party of Nepal Maoists detonated an explosive device at Banglung Bus Park in Pokharas Ward 2, injuring one person.
On January 3, suspected members of the Communist Party of Nepal Maoists caused multiple explosions at the District Education Office at Panauti in Kavre, though no casualties were reported.
The Putumayo offensive by the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) continued when the FARC bombed an oil pipeline that had just been repaired from the New Years weekend attack.  There were no fatalities or injuries reported in the press.
Insurgents attacked a convoy of sixty tanker trucks carrying oil with rocket propelled grenades (RPG) and machine gunfire. The convoy was attacked twice. The first attack occurred in Tikrit when gunmen hit a tanker with an RPG, destroying the truck, and killing the driver. Attacks on oil convoys, pipelines, and the oil industry in general are frequent in Iraq. Insurgent groups had recently threatened to attack refineries and any tanker convoys, leading to a shutdown of the major Bayji refinery for several days. The attack was claimed by the Islamic Army in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on the vehicle of an oil ministry employee in Mosul, killing him and his son. Rahim Ali al-Sudani was a director general in the oil ministry. Attacks on government employees and attacks on the oil industry and ministry are frequent in Iraq.
A car bomb exploded near a group of civilians in Karbala, wounding three people.
On January 4, a railway track near Basti Darvesh Lashari was damaged in an explosion caused by suspected members of the Baloch Liberation Army.
Mohama Masae, a village chief, was shot and killed as he was returning from the mosque and school in Pattani Province where he volunteered as a security guard.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosive device near a group of police recruits in Ramadi. The bomber detonated his explosives near a line of about 1,000 men waiting in line at a police screening center. The attack killed at least 56 people and wounded 60. Attacks on police recruits are frequent in Iraq.
Colonel Adel Abdel Karim, the head of the Intelligence Criminal Police Directorate in Baqubah, was the target of an assassination attempt when gunmen attacked him in Baqubqh. Karim was wounded in the attack and three of his bodyguards were killed. Attacks on police officials are frequent in Iraq.
Palestinian militants fired two qassam rockets on Israeli territory during the night.  No damage or injuries were reported.
In Kailali, security personnel were able to defuse a bomb that had been placed in the district development committee building.Note: Incident date is approximate.
A suicide car bomb was detonated by the bomber near a police checkpoint in Baghdad. The attack killed one policeman and wounded three others. Attacks on police in Iraq are frequent.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol in Mosul, causing several injuries, although specific numbers were not given. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
Militants fired a rocket into Israel from the former settlement of Dugit.  No damage or injuries were reported.NOTE: Target is listed as unknown because Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) were unable to locate the exact location where the rocket fell.
An explosive device was found exploded at a small electricity distribution station between Aratores and Borau, in the Huesca province.  A caller representing the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) warned of the device.  No major damages were caused by the explosion.
Palestinian militants fired a rocket from the outskirts of Gaza City, however, the explosive did not hit its intended target.  The device fell within Palestinian-controlled Gaza.  No damage or injuries were reported.
Unknown perpetrators attacked Jorge Jose Ballesteros, a senatorial candidate and son of ex-governor of La Guajira.  Ballesteros was in a barbershop when two assassins came in and shot and killed him.  A relative accompanying Ballesteros was wounded.
Raksiam Suthamwong and Panyakorn Snitpoot, policemen in Yala's Raman District, were shot and killed at a food market.
A suicide bomber detonated his car bomb near a patrol of Interior Ministry police commandos in Baghdad, wounding seven commandos and killing one. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
 The Qubail primary school in the Loya Wiyala area of Kandahar was set afire by unidentified assailants on January 8.  The attackers tied up the school's security guards and set the school on fire at 2:00am local time.  Previously, parents had received pamphlets warning them not to send their children to school.  Police have five suspects in custody.
On January 8 in Chandel district a bomb exploded at a marketplace as officials were investigating an explosion at a nearby hotel.  In total, four people were injured in the two blasts.
Two suicide bombers attacked the National Police Day celebration at the Interior Ministry compound in Baghdad, killing 29 people and wounding at least 25. Most of the casualties were policemen. The suicide bombers disguised themselves as senior police officers, one in the uniform of a police major and the other a lieutenant colonel. Both had security passes that allowed them to get through the main checkpoint and would have allowed them access to the Interior Ministry building. Police shot one of the bombers after becoming suspicious of him because of his bulk, but his explosives detonated anyway; the second bomber also detonated his explosives. Among those watching the celebrations were US Ambassador Khalilzad, Interior Minister Bayan Jabr, and Defense Minsiter Sadoun al-Dulaimi. None of these senior officials were injured in the attack. Attacks on police in Iraq and the Interior Ministry are frequent in Iraq. The attack was claimed by the Al-Qaeda linked group Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn.
In Ganderbal, unidentified gunmen shot at the home of a Peoples Democratic Party activist.  A home guard returned fire, but no injuries were reported on either side.Note: Incident date is approximate.
Insurgents attacked a police patrol in Baghdad with gunfire, killing two policemen and wounding one other. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
In Ghulam Bolak, three rockets exploded outside the Sibi airfield, although no damage was reported.Note: Incident date is approximate.
A qassam rocket was fired into Palestinian territory overnight by Palestinian militants.  Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) responded with strikes on suspected rocket launching sites in the northern Gaza Strip.  No damage or injuries were reported.NOTE: Target is listed as unknown because Israeli forces did not find the exact location where the rocket fell.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) burned two vehicles (a four wheel drive vehicle and a motorcycle) as punishment to those who were ignoring their travel ban. The FARC have been launching an ongoing offensive in the Putumayo department.  There were no fatalities or injuries reported.
On January 12, suspected members of the Baloch Liberation Army disrupted train service between Quetta and Chaman by blowing up a section of railroad track near Airport Road in Quetta.
The Al Quds Brigades, the military wing of Islamic Jihad, fired a total of five rockets on the Israeli settlements of Ashqelon and Sederot.  The group stated that the attack was in retaliation for the targeted killing of two Al-Quds Brigades commanders in Janin.  No damage or injuries were reported.
In Sambalpur district, a group of Communist Party of India-Maoists (CPI-Maoists) asked Braja Mohan Das and the other residence of his farmhouse in Titlepalli village to leave their home on January 13 before the CPI-Maoists used dynamite to blow up the house.  No casualties were reported in the incident.
A criminal intelligence officer was kidnapped in Basra. His body was found the following day in the same city. Security personnel are the frequent target of attack in Iraq.
Gunmen kidnapped an Iraqi police major and brigadier general in al-Huwayjah. The two police officers were killed by the kidnappers and their bodies were found the next day. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
Suspected members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-Maoists) detonated a bomb in front of the home of Chief of Army Staff Pyar Jung Thapas father, identified as Tej Jung Thapa, in Jorpati.  Note: Incident date is approximate.
In Chyasal, suspected members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-Maoists) used a bomb to blow up the office of the Lalitpur Sub-Metropolitan City Ward No. 9.  This was one of five similar attacks on city/municipal wards around Nepal on this day.  Note: Incident date is approximate.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) set nine vehicles on fire for ignoring the travel ban that they have been imposing during their recent offensive in Putumayo.  The vehicles, heavy transport trucks and buses according to El Colombiano,  were set on fire between the lower Putumayo and Mocoa.  The FARC were armed and in civilian clothing. There were no fatalities or injuries reported.
A former Iraqi army officer was killed by gunmen who opened fire on him in Baghdad. Members of the former Iraqi army who served under Saddam Hussein are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
Gunmen killed a police officer with the rank of colonel when they opened fire on him in Baiji. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
Unidentified assailants blew up a portion of the pipeline that supplies gas to the Uch power plant outside Dera Murad Jamali.Note: Incident date is approximate.
Kritsada Saisuk and Pattarawut Butrdeen, village defense volunteers, were found at a ferry pier in Narathiwat after they had been shot and stabbed to death.
Gunmen killed a policeman in Baghdad when they opened fire on him. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
The Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade and the Al-Nasir Salah-al-Din Brigades, the armed wing of the Popular Resistance Committees, fired two rockets at the Israeli settlement of Nativ Ha'asara.  It was reported that the attack caused several injuries, however no number was given.
On January 16 in Anantnag District, unidentified gunmen shot and killed Constable Gulzar Ahmed Rather, the nephew of Communist Party of India-Marxist (CPI-M) Legislator Mohammad Yusuf Tarigam, at Tarigam in the Kulgum area.
Four gunmen attacked the Independent Electoral Commission of Iraq offices in Kirkuk, opening fire inside the building. One election official was killed in the attack and one injured. The attack occurred only 30 minutes before an apparently coordinated attack on the headquarters of the Kurdistan Workers Party in Kirkuk, an attack which killed one person and wounded two. Attacks on political targets are frequent in Iraq.The attack was claimed by Ansar al-Sunnah Army.
Gunmen killed a police commando when they opened fire on him in Baghdad. Attacks on police in Iraq are frequent.
Gunmen kidnapped thirty-six Iraqi police recruits in Baghdad as they left the police academy following interviews necessary for their recruitment process. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The bodies of at least thirteen of the recruits were found the same day in an area north of Baghdad. There was one survivor who reported that armed men stopped their bus, forced them off, and shot them execution style. The survivor was seriously wounded. The bodies of the remaining twenty-three were found on 21 January north of Baghdad.
The Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade claimed firing two rockets at the Israeli settlement of Kefar Azza.  No damage or injuries were reported.  The group also fired rockets on Nahal Oz on this same day.
Two hired assassins for an unknown group shot and killed Jairo Romero Gonzalez, a mayoral candidate from Yumbo, and his two bodyguards while they were on the street.
Two Iraqi journalists working for the al-Iraq newspaper were wounded when gunmen opened fire on them as they traveled to work in Baghdad. Attacks on journalists are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in Baghdad exploded, injuring seven civilians and damaging nearby stores. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
The Palestinian Resistance Committees (PRC) claimed responsibility for firing two rockets at the Israeli crossing of Sofa.  No damage or injuries were reported.
Kraiphop Suratmani, a policeman, was shot and killed by six assailants in a pick-up truck passing the Maikaen train station in the Yala's Raman District.
A  car bomb exploded outside a restaurant and near a police patrol in Baghdad, killing at least seven people and wounding five others. The attack was the second part of a coordinated attack in the Saadoun Street area which killed twenty-three people and wounded twenty-six others. The first blast occurred seconds before when a suicide bomber detonated his explosives in a coffee shop.
In Pathar Nalah, unidentified assailants fired several rockets at the Sui Peerkog gas field.Note: Incident date is approximate.
A holiday villa belonging to residents of mainland France was severely damaged in a bomb attack in the town of Sagone.  The villa was under construction at the time of the attack and no one was injured.  This is the second time this home has been attacked and the fifth attack in this neighborhood in the past year.  Authorities described the bomb as high-powered.
An Iraqi police commando, Ali Hussein, was shot by unknown gunmen in Karbala when they opened fire on him. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
Four policemen were wounded when a bomb exploded near their patrol in Al-Miqdadiyah. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
A 5-kilogram bomb triggered by a cell phone exploded at the base of an antenna that belonged to DTAC, a mobile phone service provider; Manor Binyasing, a local farmer, died in the blast.
A Sunni tribal leader, Sayid Ibrahim Ali, and his son Ayad, were shot by gunmen as they left a funeral near Hawija. Tribal leaders are the frequent target of attack in Iraq.
A car bomb exploded in the Medina market in Baghdad, wounding four people and killing one.
An unknown perpetrator shot and killed municipal councilor of Sevilla, Delgar Cardenas Gonzalez.  After shooting the Councilor, the perpetrator emptied papers, agendas, and cellular phones from the victim.  There were no other injuries reported.
Near Bakshir Stadium in Srinagar, police were able to defuse an improvised explosive device weighing five kilograms at the base of an electric pole outside of Bostaan restaurant.Note: Incident date is approximate.
Thipwaree Sriploy, a teacher, was shot Saturday evening in Yala's Muang District in front of her home.
A bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, but missed the patrol, injuring instead a civilian and a police guard of the Traffic and Nationality Departments. Attacks on police in Iraq are frequent.
In Dibrugarh district, unidentified assailants detonated a bomb along a gas pipeline in Mahmora Silgrant.Note: Incident date is approximate.
On January 22 in Dibrugarh district, suspected members of the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) bombed a gas pipeline in Tengakhat.
A suicide bomber detonated his car bomb near a police patrol just outside the Green Zone in Baghdad. The blast occurred near a checkpoint to the Green Zone and outside the Iranian embassy. The attack killed two civilians and a policeman and wounded six people: three civilians and three policemen. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
An explosive device detonated near a police patrol in Kirkuk. This was one of two such explosions, which in total killed a tpoliceman and wounded eight people, including six police and two civilian bystanders. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of attack.NOTE: Casualty numbers for both explosions.
Gunmen attacked the car of the Director of the Iraqi National Computer Institute in Baghdad. The Director was not injured in the attack. Attacks on government employees are frequent in Iraq.
A timed explosive device planted beneath a high-power transformer in Jorhat was defused by police personnel on Head Post Office Road.Note: Incident date is approximate.
A bomb was thrown at the house of Slobodan Todorovic, father of Milorad Todorovic, deputy chairman of the Coordination Center for Kosovo-Metohija.  No one was hurt in the attack.  It is reported that the attack is the sixth one on the man's house, one of the few Serb-owned homes remaining in an Albanian dominated area of the village of Cernica.
Three holiday villas were damaged in an explosive attack on the island of Corsica (city not known).  This was one in a spate of attacks in the region on this night.  Authorities believe the attacks were coordinated, though no group has claimed responsibility.
Gunmen in Iraqi Army uniforms kidnapped two German engineers outside the Baiji oil refinery. The two engineers worked at a high-security Baiji refinery for the German manufacturing and engineering company Cryotec Anlagenbau GmbH and were identified as Thomas Nitzschke and Rene Braeunlich. The attack occurred when the men, who had only worked at the plant for three days, arrived at work. A third German national and an Iraqi who were also in the car at the time of the attack were able to escape because the kidnappers thought both were locals.Foreigners, particularly those who work with the Iraqi government or US forces, are the frequent target of kidnapping attacks. There has been a recent increase in kidnappings of foreigners.On January 27, a video showing the two hostages was released and aired on Al-Jazeera. In the video, which was taken on January 24, the two men were seated on the floor with four armed men behind them. The men were urging the German government to secure their release.  The kidnappers, from the Brigade of Ansar al-Tawhid Wa-Sunna, did not make any demands in the video.On January 31, a new video of the hostages was aired, showing the two men sitting on the floor with several armed men behind them. In the video, the kidnappers demanded that Germany close its embassy in Iraq, withdraw all German companies from Iraq, and end all cooperation with the Iraqi government. The kidnappers said they would kill the men in  72-hours if their demands were not met.On February 13, 2006 a new video, dated February 11 and showing the two hostages, was aired on al-Arabiyah Television. In the video, the German hostages are sitting on the ground with their hands bound. Three armed and masked men stand behind them, while a fourth reads a statement. In the statement, the group issues its final ultimatum, giving the German government one last chance to end its cooperation with the Iraqi regime, close its mission in Baghdad, and ensure that all German businesses cease dealings there. It was unclear if the new ultimatum came with a time deadline.On Sunday April 9, the captors released a video of the German hostages, in which they demanded that all prisoners held by US-led forces be released. The captors said that if their demands were not met, they would kill the two hostages. The two Germans are seated in front of a black banner with Arabic writing and can be heard begging for help. The video was dated March 28 and was posted on the internet.On April 14, 2006, sources reported that the kidnappers were seeking a $12 million dollar ransom. The source noted that after studying the most recent video of the hostages, government officials suspect that the original kidnappers sold the hostages to a criminal gang. German government officials would not comment on the report.On May 2, 2006, the two German hostages were released, unharmed. It was unclear if a ransom had been paid. Iraq's ambassador to Germany speculated that a ransom had been paid, as Germany has been suspected of paying ransom before to help free hostages help in Iraq.
A car bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, wounding one policeman and three civilians. Attacks on police in Iraq are frequent.
Unknown gunmen opened fire on the convoy of Amir Abed Risan, a director general in the office of the Iraqi council of Ministers. The attack occurred in Baghdad. Risan and two of his bodyguards were injured in the incident. Government officials are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
A Qassam rocket landed in an open field in the Western Negev.  No damage or injuries were reported.  Violence in the Gaza Strip has been escalating in the run up to the 25 January Palestinian Parliamentary elections.Al-Bawaba reported that three Qassam rockets were fired from the Gaza Strip on this day.
In a string of simultaneous attacks in Nepalgunj focusing primarily on police installations,  members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists attacked Nepal Rastra Bank in Banke district on January 24. Two members of the Security Forces, one CPN-Maoist, and one civilian were killed across all incidents, and four members of the Security Forces sustained injuries, though the number of casualties at each site is unknown.Note: Fatality and Injury figures are approximate.
In Kavre District, suspected members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists bombed Ward Office No. 2 in Banepa Municipality on January 24, damaging the building but causing no casualties.
On January 24, an explosion inside Shamaspur School in Sreenagar, Munshiganj District injured three students.
A bomb exploded in the Western Ethiopian city of Ambo.  The explosion targeted a school; however, no one was injured.  No group has claimed responsibility for the attack.NOTE: local residents believe that the bomb was planted by the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front, the ruling party.  People believe the government planted the bomb to legitimize the government's crack-down on schools where students have been protesting against the government for rigging the last election.
A Qassam rocket was fired on the Israeli settlement of Sederot.  No damage or injuries were reported.  Violence has escalated in the Gaza Strip in the run up to the 25 January Palestinian Parliamentary elections.
On January 25 two bomb explosions in West Mamoroni caused damage to two suspension towers in the 132 KV Margherita feeder double circuit tower line, though no injuries were reported.
On January 25 in Bihar, suspected members of the Communist Party of India-Maoists bombed a culvert outside of Azad Bigaha in Gaya district, but no casualties were reported.
Gunmen attacked and killed Othman Majeed Rasheed, a senior official of Iraqs anti-corruption commission, in Kirkuk when they opened fire on him. Government employees are the frequent target of insurgent attack. This was one of two assassinations of government employees in Kirkuk on this day. The attacks were separated only by a short-time span. The other attack was claimed by Ansar al-Sunnah Army. Officials believe that the attack may have been perpetrated by the same group which attacked the headquarters of the Integrity Commission and the offices of the Kurdistan Peoples Party in Krikuk on January 17. These attacks killed two people and wounded 3 and were later claimed by the Mujahideen Council, an alliance of terrorist groups including al-Qaeda in Iraq, Victorious Army Group, Ansar al-Tawhid Brigades, Islamic Jihad Brigades, the Strangers Brigades, and the Horrors Brigades.
A former employee in the Iraqi Ministry of Trade, Zaid Attah, was assassinated by gunmen who broke into his home in Baghdad and shot him. Attacks on government personnel are frequent in Iraq.
Unknown guerrillas bombed two electricity towers between Villa de las Palmas and Amaime.  There were road closures from the fallen lines, but there was not a significant disruption in service.   The press reported that pentolite was used in the attacks. There were no fatalities or injuries reported.
On January 26, suspected members of the Communist Party of India-Maoists bombed the railway track between McCluskieganj and Mahuadih railway stations, causing four cars of a cargo train to derail.  Several other trains were rerouted.  This was one of three attacks on train lines on this day.
On January 26 in Mahbubnagar district, suspected members of the Communist Party of India-Maoists bombed a restaurant run by Andhra Pradesh Tourism Development Corporation outside of Mannanur, identified as Punnami Restaurant, damaging the building by causing no casualties.
Gunmen entered a barber shop in Baghdad, killing a man who was waiting for a haircut. Attacks on barber shops are frequent in Iraq. They are perpetrated by extremists who believe that getting western-style haircuts and shaving ones face violate Islamic law.
Armed men in police uniforms raided several houses in the al-Hurriyah neighborhood of Baghdad, kidnapping sixteen Sunni residents. Sectarian attacks on Sunnis by Shiite groups are frequent.
A small bomb was detonated in front of the Justice Ministry in Nonthaburi Province on the outskirts of Bangkok. The bomb exploded in a small garden that office workers, including the four injured, frequent on their lunch breaks.
A bomb exploded in a popular market in Kut, killing two civilians and wounding three others.
Gunmen attacked a fuel convoy in Tuz Khormato, detonating a car bomb near the convoy. The attack killed one fuel tanker driver and destroyed three trucks. Attack on the oil industry, its pipelines and tanker convoys, are frequent in Iraq as insurgents try to undermine one of Iraqs important sources of income.
Gunmen fired a rocket at the home of Mahamud Daham Bidewi, an assistant to the Tikrit chief of staff under Saddam Hussein, killing him. Attacks on former members of Saddam Hussein's regime are frequent in Iraq.
Six coordinated car bombs and one roadside bomb detonated near churches in Baghdad and Kirkuk within thirty minutes of each other in a coordinated attack. Three people were killed and 17 wounded in the combined attacks. Two of the car bombs exploded in Kirkuk and four of the car bombs and the roadside bomb detonated in Baghdad. One of the car bomb explosions occurred near the Vatican City Embassy in Baghdad, wounding six people.
Six coordinated car bombs and one roadside bomb detonated near churches in Baghdad and Kirkuk within thirty minutes of each other in a coordinated attack. Three people were killed and 17 wounded in the combined attacks. Two of the car bombs exploded in Kirkuk and four of the car bombs and the roadside bomb detonated in Baghdad. One of the car bomb explosions occurred near a church in Baghdad, causing no injuries.
A bomb exploded near a candy shop in a popular market in a Shiite neighborhood in Iskindiraya, killing eleven people and wounding five others. The motivation for the attack was likely sectarian.
A member of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) was placing a bomb near an electricity tower when Gaula (Unified Action Groups to Rescue Kidnap Victims) killed him.   Waldo Jose Villanueva was a member of the 37th FARC Front and was using pentolite and aluminum in the bomb.  The attack was thwarted because of intelligence warning of the possibility of an attack in the area.
A suicide bomber detonated his car bomb by driving his vehicle into a police recruit training center at the commando headquarters in Nasiriyah. The attack killed one policeman and wounded about thirty others. Attacks on police in Iraq are frequent.The attack was claimed by the Mujahideen Council, an alliance of seven terrorist groups including al-Qaeda in Iraq (Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn), Victorious Army Group, the Army of al-Sunnah Wal Jamaa, Ansar al-Tawhid Brigades, Islamic Jihad Brigades, the Strangers Brigades, and the Horrors Brigades.On February 7, 2006, officials announced that 22 suspects had been arrested in connection with the attack.
Gunmen attacked the home of a Sunni cleric and Imam of the Rasoul Allah Mosque, Qassim Daham al-Hamdani, in Muqdadiyah, killing his wife and two young sons. Al-Hamdani was not at home at the time of the attack. The attack was likely motivated by tensions between Shiites and Sunnis.
A car bomb exploded near a police patrol in Kirkuk, causing some casualties, although specific numbers were not reported. Attacks on police in Iraq are frequent.
A 200-mile long pipeline that carried gas from the Yatana offshore gas site to the Myaing-Kalay cement factory exploded during the night; authorities allege that the explosion was caused by an unknown group of individuals, including four Burmese, two Karen, and two Indian-Burmese men.
A bomb exploded near a group of Iraqi laborers waiting at a Baghdad intersection for work, killing eight men and wounding more than fifty. The attack occurred near the Sunni al-Samaraei mosque when a man placed a bag full of explosives near a cart that sold tea to the waiting laborers. The man was not noticed at first because he carried explosives in the same kind of bag used by the laborers to carry their lunches.
An explosive device, made of up to ten to fifteen kilos of explosives, detonated at a post office in Etxebarri, in Vizcaya province.  The blast caused extensive damage to the post office, but there were no reported injuries caused.  A caller, representing the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) warned of the bomb prior to its detonation.
Abdullah Kasor, an assistant village head in Pattani's Yarang District, was shot and killed by a motorcycle rider while he was traveling home.
A car bomb detonated near a gas station in Baghdad, killing two people and wounding 13. The detonation caused a nearby oil tanker to explode, resulting in a large fire. Attacks near gas stations are frequent in Iraq, as insurgents try to target the oil industry as well as civilians at the gas station. The attack was one of two bombings in Baghdad within 20 minutes of each other. The attacks killed 11 people and wounded at least 70.
Gunmen attempted to kidnap an Iraqi translator who works with US forces, Salman Uthman, in Kirkuk. However, police interrupted the attack and arrested three of the kidnappers. Attacks on those who work with US forces are frequent.
A qassam rocket was fired on the Erez crossing from the northern Gaza Strip.  No damage or injuries were reported.
Assaman Dolor and Malayeng Jehhama, both assistant village heads, were killed and Anwar Sulong, a village head for Bangodudong, was severely injured when a mobile phone-detonated bomb filled with nails, pieces of metal and iron rods planted next to a trunk's fuel tank in front of Narathiwat's Cho Airong District Hall exploded, sending the flaming vehicle into a nearby power pole.  A meeting of local leaders was taking place inside the hall at the time of the attack.
On February 2 in Janapath Tole, suspected members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists attacked a ward chairman from Biratnagar, identified as Triveni Mahji, killing one civilian and injuring Mahji in the attack.
Gunmen kidnapped a policeman, Akrab Abdulrahamn, and his driver, Faisal Hazza, when they attacked the policemans car. No information on the fate of the men was given. Attacks on police in Iraq are frequent.
In Helmand District, suspected members of the Taliban attacked Helmands Deputy Governor and Helmands Security commander on February 3.  The attack took place in Sangin District, and it is reported that three police officers and sixteen Taliban were killed in the ensuing battle.
On February 3, suspected members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists bombed the house of a mayoral candidate for Tikapur Municipality, identified as Bishnudevi Rawal, though no injuries were reported. There was one other attack against a mayoral candidate in Tikapur that day, and yet another in Kapibastu.
In Batticaloa Province the principal of Valachenai Hindu College, identified as Murugesu Thavarasa, was kidnapped by suspected members of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam in Hindu Kovil.Note: Incident date is approximate.
Jaran Nuanloy, Ake-Kachai Chuplod, Wirat Intasuwan, and Prakornkij Lueng-Lam, all off-duty policemen, were injured when a bomb exploded underneath a table in a snooker house in Narathiwat's Bacho District.  NOTE: It is unknown if the police officers or the business was the target of the attack.
Gunmen kidnapped a policeman in Kirkuk. No information on his fate was given. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
On February 4 in Balochistan, suspected members of the Baloch Liberation Army blew up a gas well and a 60-foot pipeline at the Loti gas plat in Dera Bugti.
Gunmen assassinated Basra prison warden Major Walid Zamel when they opened fire on him. Attacks on security personnel and officials are frequent in Iraq.
Insurgents launched a set of coordinated roadside bombings in the city of Madain, killing a total of five civilians and wounding five civilians and a policeman. The second explosion targeted a police patrol that responded to the earlier detonation of a roadside bomb near a minibus.  The second attack wounded six, including one policemen. This type of coordinated bombing, which targets police responders to an earlier attack, is increasingly common in Iraq.
A Palestinian man attacked five people on a bus in Petach Tikva, killing one woman.  The assailant boarded the bus and began stabbing people when it stopped.  The driver opened the door and shouted 'terrorist, terrorist' attracting passers-by and security guards from a nearby factory who were able to overpower the attacker.  Police stated that the incident was politically motivated, and the attacker is reported to have revealed to authorities that he came to Tel Aviv to kill Jews.  The attack occurred only hours after the Israeli forces killed three militants in a strike in southern Gaza.   No organization claimed responsibility for the attack in Petach Tikva.
On February 5, suspected members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists bombed the home of Nar Bahadur Gharti, an independent candidate for Deputy Mayor in Ward-7.  There have been several attacks on mayoral candidates in recent days, including an attack against a candidate for Deputy Mayor in Ward-8 on the same day.
A small truck bomb exploded near the Al-Dora refinery in Baghdad. The explosion damaged the two buildings where refinery workers live, but did not cause any damage to the refinery or cause any disruption in oil production. Six workers were injured in the attacks. Insurgents frequently target the oil industry, its pipelines, refineries, and workers in attempts to disrupt the primary source of income for Iraq and to destabilize the Iraqi government.
Three teachers were shot and severely wounded as they waited in a pick-up truck for a military escort to return to their homes in Yala's Krong Pinang District.
Gunmen in Baqubah killed a policeman, Hussein Ali Lazem, when they opened fire on him as he left his home.
An Iraqi contractor who worked with US forces was killed by gunmen Dujail. Those who work with US forces are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
Andrea Santoro, an Italian Catholic priest, was shot twice in the back as prayed in his church in the city of Trabzon.  According the witnesses, the gunman yelled Allahu Akbar (God is Great) in Arabic before opening fire on the priest.  A 16-year-old boy was arrested and charged with this shooting.  Police believe the attack is linked to worldwide protests over a Danish cartoon depicting Allah as a terrorist. The suspect is not believed to have any ties to organized terror groups.
On February 6 in Jharkhand, 15 suspected members of the Communist Party of India-Maoists blew up a section of the Karampeda railway station in West Singhbhum.
A roadside bomb detonated near a police patrol vehicle in Basra, wounding four officers. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
In Helmand Province, unidentified assailants set fire to a boys middle school in the Loymanda area of Nadali District on February 7.  Local residents were able to extinguish the fire before much damage was done, but the assailants got away.
In Wana, unidentified individuals threw two hand grenades at the Ajmal Hospital on February 7.  Only a guard was in the hospital at the time, so no injuries or casualties were reported.  On the same day, the Agency Headquarters Hospital in Wana was also attacked.
Gunmen in Baghdad opened fire on a group of Shiites performing Ashura rituals, wounding six people. The attack likely had sectarian motivation.
An attack on Shiite civilians celebrating Ashura was prevented when police found and defused 10 homemade bombs planted under a bridge in Latifiyah. The attack appeared to have been planned to correspond with the Shiite Ashura holiday.
Armed gunmen attacked and killed a policeman in Baqubah when they opened fire on him. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) made threats on unknown victims and then put a bomb in the victims' home (after it had been abandoned). The Army disarmed the bomb and there were no injuries or fatalities reported. The Army says that the bomb was put there by the Teofilo Forero Mobile Column of the FARC.
Two members of a leading Shiite political party were killed in Baghdad. One of the members was identified as Haider Baha Saeed. Attacks on political figures and those who support the Shiite-led Iraqi government are frequent in Iraq.
Insurgents blew up a childrens hospital in Samarra that was under construction, causing significant damage. Attacks on efforts of Iraqi reconstruction are frequent in Iraq.
The Al Quds Brigades, the armed wing of Palestinian Islamic Jihad, claimed responsibility for firing two rockets on the Israeli settlement of Sederot.  No damage or injuries were reported.
Unidentified gunmen opened fire on a minibus in Saidan Banda, killing four people on February 9.  The attack coincided with the bombing of a Muharram procession in nearby Hangu.
Gunmen in Iraqi army uniforms broke into the home of Nidthal Mohammad, a policewoman in Baqubah, and killed her. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A qassam rocket landed in an open field in the Israeli settlement of Sederot.  No damage or injuries were reported.
Gunmen attacked and killed a traffic policeman, Ahmed Majeed Obaid, as he left his home in Baghdad. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A qassam rocket  fired on the western Negev landed in an open field.  No damage or injuries were reported.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosive belt near a police patrol in Baghdad, killing a civilian and wounding eight people, including three police. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb exploded near an Iraqi police special forces vehicle in Northern Baghdad, wounding three civilians, killing two other civilians, and damaging the police vehicle. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
The director of physical education in Baqubah was killed by unknown gunmen who opened fire on him. Local government officials are the frequent target of attack in Iraq.
Two bombs exploded simultaneously near a police patrol in Baghdad, wounding twelve people. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
The Suraya al-Quds, an armed wing of Palestine Islamic Jihad (PIJ), claimed responsibility for firing two qassam rockets on the Israeli settlement of Ashqelon.  No damage or injuries were reported.  The group stated that the attack was in response to Israeli assassinations of PIJ commanders in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Gunmen entered a restaurant in Fallujah and killed a policeman. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen attacked and killed a policeman protecting electricity generating facilities near a hospital in Baghdads Sadr City. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq, as are attacks on utilities and those guarding them.
Gunmen fired a rocket-propelled grenade at a fuel truck in Dujail. The attack set the truck on fire. Attacks on fuel trucks, oil pipelines, and the oil industry are frequent in Iraq. Insurgents attack the oil industry to destabilize one of Iraqs major sources of income and undermine the new Iraqi regime.
Gunmen killed Colonel Mahdi Mutlaq, the director of training for Baghdads police forces.  The attack occurred in Baghdad, near Mutlaqs home, when gunmen opened fire on him.
Unknown perpetrators shot and killed a journalist, Jose Luis Leon Desiderio, in Bastion Popular. The motives are still unknown. There were no injuries reported. On 17 February another journalist was shot and killed in Guayas.
Gunmen launched an attack on a group of Shiites near Balad, killing eleven people and wounding four others. The attack was targeting the tribal chieftain of the Hayalin tribe, Hassan al-Sirhan. Gunmen opened fire on al-Sirhan when he arrived at his farm near Balad in a truck filled with farm workers including three of his sons. Al-Sirhan, one of his sons, and nine other workers, including some other relatives, were killed. Four workers, including two of al-Sirhans sons, were wounded in the attack. Attacks on Shiites by Sunni gunmen are frequent. Tribal leaders are also targeted frequently for their involvement in local politics.
A car bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, wounding three civilians. Attacks on police in Iraq are frequent.
Gunmen opened fire on the car of a police colonel in Baqubah as he drove to work, wounding him and his bodyguard. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A vehicle packed with explosives was discovered by security forces traveling through the eastern area of Khost Province.  Security officials believe that the car was intended to be driven as a suicide bomb to a target in Khost City.  Police are investigating the perpetrators and target of this potential attack.Note: Incident date is approximate.
On February 14 in Dailekh district, members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists blew up the reservoir tanks of two drinking water supply projects in Narayan, shutting both projects down after demanding the release of detained Maoists.  The two affected projects, identified as the Belaspur Drinking Water Project in Kharigoura VDC-8 and Dailekh Bazaar Drinking Water Project in Bhavani VDC-9, supply drinking water to over 20,000 people in surrounding areas.
Gunmen opened fire on a police captain, Huseein Ali Youssef, and his driver who was also a policeman, in Baghdad, killing both. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A qassam rocket landed in an open area of the western Negev.  No damage or injuries were reported.  The Al Quds Brigades, the armed wing of Palestinian Islamic Jihad, claimed responsibility for firing two rockets on Israel on this day.
A car bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, killing one civilian and wounding three people, including two police officers and one civilian. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The attack was claimed by the Mujahideen Council, an alliance made up of seven terrorist organizations including al-Qaeda in Iraq, Victorious Army Group, the Army of al-Sunnah Wal Jamaa, Ansar al-Tawhid Brigades, Islamic Jihad Brigades, the Strangers Brigades, and the Horrors Brigades.
A car bomb exploded near the convoy of a former government human rights official, Nouri al-Nouri, in Baghdad. Al-Nouri was not injured in the attack, but four civilian by-standers were wounded. Al-Nouri was dismissed in December after the discovery of tortured detainees in an Interior Ministry jail. Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.
A car bomb exploded in a crowded market in the Shula district of Baghdad, killing six civilians and wounding 13 others.
Suspected members of the Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC) carried out a bomb attack in Coti-Chiavari which damaged two holiday villas.  One of the villas was severely damaged.  Both the homes were owned by residents of mainland France.  The FLNC dedicated this attack to one of its fallen comrades, Emile Corticchiato.  The words Emile Corticchiato sempre vivu (lives forever) were found written at the scene of the attack.
On February 16, suspected members of the Taliban attacked a police vehicle in the Maiwan District of Kandahar, killing two policemen and injuring two others.  Following the incident, spokesman Qari Mohammad Yousuf claimed responsibility for the attack on behalf of the Taliban.
A roadside bomb detonated near a police car in Al-Yousifiya, killing a policeman and wounding two others. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen killed the owner of a gas station, Mohammed Al-Ajmi, in Fallujah when they opened fire on him as he was selling an oil tanker outside his station. Gunmen frequently target gas stations, oil pipelines, and the oil industry. In this case, some Fallujah residents reported that gunmen had posted warnings against selling oil on the black market or smuggling it. Insurgents use attacks on the oil industry to disrupt one of Iraqs only profitable industries and undermine the new government.
Eleven policemen and two others were wounded when a bomb hidden under a coconut tree was detonated by mobile phone during a crime scene investigation at the Tanyongmas market in Narathiwat.
A roadside bomb detonated near a group of security guards in Baghdad, wounding two security guards. Attacks on security personnel are frequent in Iraq.
The Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade claimed responsibility for launching a rocket attack on the Israeli settlement of Sederot.  No damage or injuries were reported.
A roadside bomb exploded near the convoy of General Khatam Khalaf al-Obeidi, the deputy police chief of Kirkuk, killing him and two of his bodyguards. The attack occurred in Kirkuk. Attacks on police officials are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb detonated near a police patrol in northern Iraq, wounding eight police. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of attack.
Four police were wounded when an explosive device detonated near their patrol in Khalis. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on an Iraqi who works with US forces in Yathrib. Saba Hamid Hussein was killed in the attack. Attacks on those who work with US forces are frequent in Iraq.
Korlet Sa-a, a teacher at the Ma-ahat Islamiya Withaya School in the Raman District, was shot dead while he was leaving school.  Sa-a stopped to answer his mobile phone when he was killed by a pillion rider on a motorcycle.
On February 19, a series of 5 remote detonated devices exploded along the pipeline at the Loti Gas Plant in Balochistan, interrupting the supply of gas from the gas field.  Explosive devices also detonated along the pipeline at the Pirkoh Gas Plant in Balochistan on this same day.  It is unclear if the attacks were coordinated.
A bomb exploded near a group of construction workers who were gathering before the start of their work day near Liberation square in Baghdad. The attack killed at least four laborers and wounded 19. There have been several attacks on groups of day laborers in Baghdad in recent months.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, wounding two police. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
The armed wing of the Popular Resistance Committees, in a joint attack with the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade, launched a rocket attack on the Israeli settlement of Sederot.  The Popular Resistance Committees also claimed firing rockets on the Kissufim crossing on this day.
A bomb exploded in a street in Manila's financial district, Makati; the blast injured a boy.  This attack occurred just after an explosion at the Presidential Palace.  It is unclear if the two were related.
In Balochistan, unidentified assailants bombed the gas pipeline to well number 19 at the Pirkoh Gas Plant in Dera Bugti.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, killing two police commandos and wounding four people including three police and a civilian. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Eight shops in Baqubah were attacked in almost simultaneous bomb explosions. Those stores targeted included four beauty parlors, a photo shop, an electrical repair outlet, a jewelry store, and a shampoo store. The attack occurred at night and no one was injured.
The UN envoy to Baghdad, Asraf Qadi, was the target of an assassination attempt when a roadside bomb exploded near his convoy in Ramadi.  No injuries were reported.  Attacks on diplomatic officials are frequent in Iraq.
Militants associated with the Salafist Group for Call and Combat (GSPC) killed a repentant militant going by name of  D.H near Cap Djinet, 30km from Boumerdes. The motive for the attack centered around  D.H.'s surrender to Algerian authorities in 2003.
On February 21, suspected members of the Balochistan Liberation Army (BLA) bombed a pipeline supplying gas to Dera Bugti, causing the supply of gas to be suspended.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Baghdad. This was one of more than 90 attacks on mosques in Baghdad and one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq over two days. In Baghdad, at least eight people, including several mosque imams and some worshippers, were killed in the attacks. Nationwide, a total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Baghdad. This was one of more than 90 attacks on mosques in Baghdad and one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq over a period of two days. In Baghdad, at least eight people, including several mosque imams and some worshippers, were killed in the attacks. Nationwide, a total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Baghdad. This was one of more than 90 attacks on mosques in Baghdad and one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq over a period of two days. In Baghdad, at least eight people, including several mosque imams and some worshippers, were killed in the attacks. Nationwide, a total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
The Sunni Al-Hamza Mosque was attacked in Baghdad by gunmen that fired machine guns at it and then burned it down. This was one of 90 attacks on Sunni mosques in Baghdad and one of more than 168 in the country overall. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
Gunmen attacked the al-Rashidi mosque in Baghdad with gunfire, killing the Imam of the mosque, Sheik Khalil al-Dulaimi. This was one of 90 attacks on Sunni mosques in Baghdad and one of more than 168  in the country overall. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
Three Iraqi contractors who worked with the US army were kidnapped by unknown gunmen in Fallujah. Those who work with US forces are the frequent target of attack in Iraq.
Gunmen in Diwaniya opened fire on a Shiite police officer guarding a Sunni mosque. The officer was killed in the attack. The incident comes the day of attack on the Shiite Askariya shrine and in the midst of reprisals by Shiites for this attack. At least 168 Sunni mosques were attacked around the country.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Baghdad. This was one of more than 90 attacks on mosques in Baghdad and one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq over a period of two days. In Baghdad, at least eight people, including several mosque imams and some worshippers, were killed in the attacks. Nationwide, a total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Baghdad. This was one of more than 90 attacks on mosques in Baghdad and one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq over a period of two days. In Baghdad, at least eight people, including several mosque imams and some worshippers, were killed in the attacks. Nationwide, a total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Baghdad. This was one of more than 90 attacks on mosques in Baghdad and one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq over a period of two days. In Baghdad, at least eight people, including several mosque imams and some worshippers, were killed in the attacks. Nationwide, a total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation. NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Baghdad. This was one of more than 90 attacks on mosques in Baghdad and one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq over a period of two days. In Baghdad, at least eight people, including several mosque imams and some worshippers, were killed in the attacks. Nationwide, a total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Baghdad. This was one of more than 90 attacks on mosques in Baghdad and one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq over a period of two days. In Baghdad, at least eight people, including several mosque imams and some worshippers, were killed in the attacks. Nationwide, a total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Baghdad. This was one of more than 90 attacks on mosques in Baghdad and one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq over a period of two days. In Baghdad, at least eight people, including several mosque imams and some worshippers, were killed in the attacks. Nationwide, a total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Iraq. This was one of more than 168  attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq on this day. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  A total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Iraq. This was one of more than 168  attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq on this day. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  A total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Iraq. This was one of more than 168  attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq on this day. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  A total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Iraq. This was one of more than 168  attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq on this day. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  A total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Iraq. This was one of more than 168  attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq on this day. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  A total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Iraq. This was one of more than 168  attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq on this day. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  A total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Iraq. This was one of more than 168  attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq on this day. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  A total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Iraq. This was one of more than 168  attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq on this day. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  A total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Iraq. This was one of more than 168  attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq on this day. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  A total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Iraq. This was one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq. A total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped in the attacks which occurred over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Iraq. This was one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq. A total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped in the attacks which occurred over two days. The attack comes after a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Iraq. This was one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq. A total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped in the attacks which occurred over two days. The attack comes after a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Iraq. This was one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq. A total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped in the attacks which occurred over two days. The attack comes after a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Iraq. This was one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq. A total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped in the attacks which occurred over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Iraq. This was one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq. A total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped in the attacks which occurred over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Iraq. This was one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq. A total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped in the attacks which occurred over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Iraq. This was one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq. A total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped in the attacks which occurred over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Baghdad. This was one of more than 90 attacks on mosques in Baghdad and one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq over two days. In Baghdad, at least eight people, including several mosque imams and some worshippers, were killed in the attacks. Nationwide, a total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Baghdad. This was one of more than 90 attacks on mosques in Baghdad and one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq over two days. In Baghdad, at least eight people, including several mosque imams and some worshippers, were killed in the attacks. Nationwide, a total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Baghdad. This was one of more than 90 attacks on mosques in Baghdad and one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq over two days. In Baghdad, at least eight people, including several mosque imams and some worshippers, were killed in the attacks. Nationwide, a total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Baghdad. This was one of more than 90 attacks on mosques in Baghdad and one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq over a period of two days. In Baghdad, at least eight people, including several mosque imams and some worshippers, were killed in the attacks. Nationwide, a total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Baghdad. This was one of more than 90 attacks on mosques in Baghdad and one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq over two days. In Baghdad, at least eight people, including several mosque imams and some worshippers, were killed in the attacks. Nationwide, a total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Baghdad. This was one of more than 90 attacks on mosques in Baghdad and one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq over two days. In Baghdad, at least eight people, including several mosque imams and some worshippers, were killed in the attacks. Nationwide, a total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
Gunmen in Iraqi army uniforms entered a jail in Basra and kidnapped 12 Sunni prisoners, including two Egyptians, one Saudi, and nine Iraqis.  The gunmen took the 12 men from the jail and shot them all. Their bodies were later found throughout Basra. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.
Suspected members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists interrupted the supply of water to Chourjahari and Jajarkot districts after cutting the pipelines through which the water traveled.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Iraq. This was one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq. A total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped in the attacks which occurred over two days. The attack comes after a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Iraq. This was one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq. A total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped in the attacks which occurred over two days. The attack comes after a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Iraq. This was one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq. A total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped in the attacks which occurred over two days. The attack comes after a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Baghdad. This was one of more than 90 attacks on mosques in Baghdad and one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq over  two days. In Baghdad, at least eight people, including several mosque imams and some worshippers, were killed in the attacks. Nationwide, a total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Baghdad. This was one of more than 90 attacks on mosques in Baghdad and one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq over  two days. In Baghdad, at least eight people, including several mosque imams and some worshippers, were killed in the attacks. Nationwide, a total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Baghdad. This was one of more than 90 attacks on mosques in Baghdad and one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq over  two days. In Baghdad, at least eight people, including several mosque imams and some worshippers, were killed in the attacks. Nationwide, a total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Baghdad. This was one of more than 90 attacks on mosques in Baghdad and one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq over  two days. In Baghdad, at least eight people, including several mosque imams and some worshippers, were killed in the attacks. Nationwide, a total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Baghdad. This was one of more than 90 attacks on mosques in Baghdad and one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq over  two days. In Baghdad, at least eight people, including several mosque imams and some worshippers, were killed in the attacks. Nationwide, a total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Baghdad. This was one of more than 90 attacks on mosques in Baghdad and one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq over  two days. In Baghdad, at least eight people, including several mosque imams and some worshippers, were killed in the attacks. Nationwide, a total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Baghdad. This was one of more than 90 attacks on mosques in Baghdad and one of more than 168 attacks on Sunni mosques throughout Iraq over a period of  two days. In Baghdad, at least eight people, including several mosque imams and some worshippers, were killed in the attacks. Nationwide, a total of 10 mosque Imams were killed and 15 kidnapped over two days. The attack comes following a bomb attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites, and was likely perpetrated in retaliation.  NOTE: The number of mosques attacked varied depending on the source.  The United States government provided a significantly lower number of attacks.
Gunmen created a makeshift checkpoint on the road between Samarra and Baghdad and stopped the vehicles of many Shiites and Sunnis returning from protesting the bombing of the Askariya Shrine, a holy site for Shiites, in Samarra. The gunmen forced at least 47 people from their cars and shot them, leaving their bodies in a ditch in Nahrawan.
A Sunni preacher was killed by gunmen in the Shiite city of Hillah. The attack comes amid a surge in sectarian violence following the bombing of the Askariya shrine in Samarra, a holy site for Shiites.
Militants attacked the COSIDER cement plant where they destroyed the company's vehicles before torching the plant.  In the process of the attack, a patriot named H. Lounes,  tried to stop the militants.  The patriot was killed by the militants before they escaped.  Prior to this attack, the militants sabotaged the National Gas Company's electrical plant which cut electricity to the entire area.
Gunmen in Basra kidnapped three children of a Shiite legislator, Qasim Attiyah al-Jbouri, who is a member of the Islamic Dawa Party-Iraq Organization and former head of Basra's provincial council. The attack occurred outside Jbouri's home in Basra. The children were later freed during a raid in the city in which one suspect was arrested. The attack comes amid a surge in sectarian violence following the attack on the Askariya shrine, a holy site for Shiites. Attacks on the families of Iraqi political figures are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on an Interior Ministry police commando patrol in Baghdad, killing one commando and wounding four others. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Baghdad by gunmen who opened fire on it. This was one of hundreds of attacks on Sunni mosques in the wake of an attack on a Shiite holy site, the Askariya shrine in Samarra. No injuries were reported in this incident.
A muezzin, one who calls Muslims to prayer in a mosque, was assassinated by gunmen. The attack likely had sectarian motivations and occurs amid a spike in sectarian violence following an attack on a Shiite holy site, the Askariya mosque in Samarra.
A police team on its inspection round encountered a bomb blast on a road in Narathiwat's Sungai Padi District followed immediately by insurgent fire on their vehicle. A policeman and a villager were killed, while four other officers were injured in the multifaceted attack.
A French group, calling themselves Solidarity with Imprisoned Members of Action Directe (AD) claimed responsibility for bombing a bank branch in Maroussi, north of Athens.  The attack was carried out with a homemade explosive device against the BNP Paribas Bank.  There were no reported injuries.  Two calls to a Greek newspaper proceeded the attack and an anonymous caller claimed responsibility to the same newspaper after the fact as well.
Gunmen attacked the home of the head of the Sunni clerical group, the Association of Muslim Scholars, Harith al-Dhari, in Baghdad. Al-Dharis guards returned fire. Al-Dhari was not injured in the attack. The attack occurred as the funeral procession of an Al-Arabiya television correspondent, Atwar Bahjat, who was killed by gunmen in Samarra where she was covering the attack on the Askariya shrine, a Shiite holy site, passed by. Several people were injured, including gunmen, police commandos, and security guards. However, specific numbers were not given.
A car bomb exploded in a market in Karbala, killing eight people and wounding 31 others. The attack likely had sectarian motivations and occurred amid a spike in sectarian violence following an attack on a Shiite holy site, the Askariya mosque in Samarra. A suspect arrested after the attack said that the target was the city's holy shrines of Imam Hussein and his half-brother Abbas. However, the bomber was unable to reach to his intended target.
A Sunni mosque was attacked in Baghdad by Shiite gunmen. This was one of hundreds of attacks on Sunni mosques in the wake of an attack on a Shiite holy site, the Askariya shrine in Samarra.
A homemade explosive device, made up of a small amount of explosives, a timer and a detonator, exploded outside a French bank in the Greek city of Maroussi.  No damages were caused by the blast.  An anonymous caller warned of the blast and stated that the attack was perpetrated in support for the uprising in French ghettos.
A bomb exploded on a crowded bus as passengers were boarding the bus, killing two people and injuring four others. The attack occurred when a man boarded the bus with a bomb and left the bomb before leaving the bus. Hillah is a predominantly Shiite city. The attack likely had sectarian motivations and comes amid a spike in sectarian violence following an attack on a Shiite holy site, the Askariya shrine in Samarra.
Gunmen opened fire on a group of boys playing soccer in Baqubah, killing two and wounding five. The attack likely had sectarian motivations and occurs amid a spike in sectarian violence following an attack on a Shiite holy site, the Askariya mosque in Samarra.
Several mortars were fired at a joint Sunni-Shiite demonstration in Baghdad. The demonstration was intended as a show of unity amid a spike in sectarian violence following an attack on a Shiite holy site, the Askariya mosque in Samarra. At least 15 people were killed and 45 wounded in the incident.
In Khost Province, unidentified assailants bombed a girls secondary school in Nadar Shah Kot District on February 26.  Four school guards have been arrested in the ensuing investigation.
In Punjab province, unidentified assailants blew up the main gas pipeline of the Sui Northern Gas Pipeline Limited in Rajanpur on February 26.  The explosion interrupted the gas supply to Punjab and North West Frontier Provinces and also melted part of a nearby railroad track, which suspended train service on the Multan-Quetta train route through Dera Ghazi Khan.
Two bombs exploded simultaneously near the That al-Nitaqain Mosque, a Sunni mosque in Baghdad, just as worshippers were leaving the mosque following evening prayers. Four people were killed and 15 wounded in the incident. The attack comes amid a spike in sectarian violence following an attack on a Shiite holy site, the Askariya shrine in Samarra. The attack comes only hours after a three-day curfew was lifted in Baghdad.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) attacked Rivera Municipal council members during a meeting in Los Gabrieles club restaurant. Eight of the ten members present were shot and killed.  There were also reports that three of the four guards for the council were also dead.  There were no injuries reported.  The municipal council had been receiving threats from the FARC and some members had moved outside of the municipality for security reasons.Other sources: ACAN-EFE, 27 Feb
At least three people were injured in three separate bomb attacks in Iran's Khuzestan province.  A bomb placed in the men's room of the Abadan Governor's offices exploded, injuring one person.  The others exploded at the Governor's offices in Dezful and the village of Malashi, near the capital of Ahvaz.  Khuzestan is Iran's most oil-rich province and home to many of Iran's minority Arabs.  The province and its capital have been targeted in several bomb attacks in recent months.
On February 27, unidentified gunmen attacked a train as it traveled between Sibi and Mach in Balochistan Province.  After attacking the train with guns, the suspected attackers blew up a section of railroad track, causing the two cars of the train to derail near Oseypur, though no injuries were reported.
A car bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, killing nine people and wounding 17 others, all civilians. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb exploded near the convoy of Lt. Gen. Daham Radhi al-Assal, a defense ministry adviser, killing five bodyguards and wounding seven others. Al-Assal was not injured in the attack. Government officials are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.The attack was claimed by the Mujahideen Council, an alliance of terrorist groups including al-Qaeda in Iraq, Victorious Army Group, the Army of al-Sunnah Wal Jamaa, Ansar al-Tawhid Brigades, Islamic Jihad Brigades, the Strangers Brigades, and the Horrors Brigades.
A car bomb exploded near a police patrol in Kirkuk, wounding three civilians. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A car bomb exploded near the Shiite Abdel Hadi Chalabi mosque in Baghdad,  killing 23 people and wounding 55 others. This was one of several large bombings in Baghdad on this day, following the end of a three-day curfew in the city intended to stem sectarian violence which has spiked since the attack on the Askariya shrine in Samarra, a holy site for Shiites.
A bomb hidden under a vegetable stall exploded in a food market in Narathiwat Province injuring at least eight villagers.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), 19th Front, detonated explosives the gas pipeline from La Guajira to the Atlantic Coast near km. 84.  There were no fatalities or injuries reported.  However, a bridge nearby was damaged from the explosion. This damage affects traffic from La Guajira to Magdalena departments.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) burned two vehicles. It is not clear whether there were passengers aboard and no fatalities or injuries were reported. The city has a gas shortage and the FARC are intimidating the fuel truck drivers. This attack follows an escalation of attacks in the country in anticipation of elections. The governor is trying to arrange security caravans for commercial and public transportation.
A police patrol was ambushed in Riyad. The attack killed three police and wounded five others. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
A car bomb exploded near a mosque and a market in Baghdad. Police had been alerted to the presence of the suspicious vehicle just prior to the explosion and were able to clear the market area before the detonation.  No injuries were caused. The attack comes amid a spike in violence following an attack on a Shiite holy site, the Askariya shrine in Samarra.
Insurgents opened fire on a group of firemen and police who arrived in response to an explosion at an oil pipeline that caused a large fire in Musayyib. Two firemen were wounded in the attack.  Attacks on oil pipelines are frequent in Iraq. Insurgents target the oil industry to disrupt a major source of revenue for Iraq and undermine the Iraqi government. Attacks on police are also frequent.
The Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade fired rockets on the Israeli settlement of Kfar Azza.  The group also claimed an attack on Sederot.  A total of five rockets were fired into Israel on this day, with several others landing within Palestinian territory.
A postman was killed by two gunmen while collecting the mail in Yala's Muang District.
Four Molotov cocktails were thrown at the courthouse in San Sebastian by unidentified perpetrators.  No damages were caused and no further information is available.
In North Waziristan, members of the Taliban occupied several government buildings in the provincial headquarters of Miranshah.  Following a fight with local security forces on March 1, Taliban militants took over the telephone exchange and irrigation department building, stole government vehicles, and took rooftop positions around the main market area.  In response, paramilitary forces have been pulled out of the main bazaar in Miranshah.
A bomb exploded near a police station in a vegetable market in the Zafaraniyah neighborhood of Baghdad, killing eight people and wounding fourteen. A second bomb in the same area failed to detonate and was defused. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb detonated near a police commando patrol in Baghdad, wounding three commandos and killing one. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb detonated near a police commando patrol, killing one and wounding another. The attack occurred in Salman Pak. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) blew up an electricity tower, leaving five municipalities without power.  There were no fatalities or injuries reported. This attack follows an escalation of attacks on utilities and transportation in the run-up to elections.
Five rockets were fired at Isreali territory; several landed near the security fence.  No damage or injuries were reported.
A bomb was planted under a traffic police patrol vehicle in Nazran. It was safely defused.
Suspected members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists detonated several explosives throughout Jhapa district.  One explosion occurred at the Land Revenue office, but no casualties were reported.
Gunmen kidnapped and killed two policemen in Kirkuk. Police are the frequent target of attack in Iraq.
On March 3, suspected Taliban militants attacked the home of Mira Jan, the District Chief of Sangin in Helmand Province, shooting and killing Jan in his own home.  While officials blame the Taliban, an investigation is being conducted.
In Bokaro District, more than 200 left-wing extremists attacked the Central Industrial Security Force camp near the border with Dhanbad district, killing one security personnel in a bomb blast.  Extremists also attacked the police outpost near the border with Dhanbad district on this day.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police command center in Baghdad, wounding three people, including two police commandos. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen dressed in police commando uniforms attacked the al-Noor Sunni mosque in western Baghdad, killing three mosque guards and wounding six others during a protracted gun battle. The attack likely had sectarian motivations and comes amid a spike in sectarian violence following an attack on the Shiite Askariya Shrine.
A leading Shiite lawmaker, Qasim Attiyah al-Jbouri, a member of the Islamic Dawa Party-Iraq Organization, escaped assassination when gunmen opened fire on his convoy in Basra. Al-Jbouri's vehicle was hit several times and flipped over, but al-Jbouri was not injured in the attack. One of al-Jbouri's aides was killed and two of his bodyguards were injured in the attack. This was the second assassination attempt on al-Jbouri in ten days. Attacks on politicians and government members are frequent in Iraq.
One person was injured when members of the Kurdistan Freedom Hawks (TAK) perpetrated a bomb attack on a police station in Izmir.  The device was made of plastic explosives and placed in a cart.  The blast caused damage to several buildings nearby.  The TAK states that they perpetrated the attack in response to the government's treatment of the Kurdish minority.  The group also warned of further attacks.
Taliban militants detonated a remote control bomb as the car of the Nad Ali District Intelligence Chief, identified as Mohammad Ali Barak, was passing by.  The attack, which occurred in Helmand Province, killed Barak and the three bodyguards traveling with him.  Taliban spokesman Qari Mohammad Yousuf Ahmadi claimed responsibility for the attack on behalf of the Taliban.Note: Incident date is approximate.
Two electricity workers were attacked and killed in Baghdad by gunmen who opened fire on them. Attacks on utilities and utility workers are frequent in Iraq. Gunmen attack utilities to undermine the new Iraqi regime and its ability to provide services to the Iraqi people.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) burned two buses. There were no reports of injuries or fatalities.  This attack follows a FARC armed shutdown in Tolima and multiple attacks on the transportation sector.
On March 5, suspected members of the Communist Party of India-Maoists rounded up a group of nine Communist Party of India-Marxists (a political party) and killed their leader, identified as Kartik Sinha, in a field in West Mindapore before releasing the others.  The 9 Marxists were returning from a meeting in Harulia village where CPM state secretary Anil Biswas called for party activists to counter the Maoists.
The body of Said Badshah, a private school teacher and son of a pro-government tribal elder, was found decapitated near Barwan Village in Wana, South Waziristan after he failed to return home from work on the evening of March 5.  It is suspected that the Taliban is responsible for the murder, as they have killed several tribal elders and their relatives in the area recently for supporting operations against the Taliban.
A suicide car bomber detonated his vehicle near a police commando patrol in Baghdad near al-Mustansiriyah University. Two policemen were killed and three were injured in the attack. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A suicide bomber detonated his vehicle near a police patrol in Baghdad's Dora district. One person was killed and five others wounded, including two policemen, in the attack. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A car bomb exploded near a police patrol in Mahmoudiya, killing a civilian and wounding three people, including two policemen. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Insurgents attempted to detonate an explosive device under an oil pipeline in Kirkuk. However, the device detonated as they were planting it, killing all three. Attacks on oil pipelines and the oil industry are frequent in Iraq. Insurgents attack the oil industry to disrupt one of Iraq's major industries and undermine the new Iraqi regime.
On March 6, a bomb that was placed outside the Ghalikhel mosque in eastern Nangarhar Province failed to explode and was subsequently defused by security officials.  Officials report that the bombs remote-controlled fuse went off as a police vehicle passed by the area, but the bomb failed to explode.  No arrests have been made.
A car bomb exploded near a gas station in Hillah, but caused no casualties. This was one of four explosions in Hillah on this day. Insurgents often target gas stations in Iraq. Attacks on gas stations and the oil industry are aimed at disrupting one of Iraq's major industries and undermining the new Iraqi regime.
Gunmen opened fire on the office of Shiite cleric Moqtada al-Sadr in Baqubah, killing three members of the office and wounding two others. The attack likely had sectarian motivations and comes amid a spike in sectarian violence following an attack on the Shiite Askariya shrine.
An official at a Sunni TV station was killed by gunmen in Baghdad who opened fire on him. Attacks on journalists and media personnel are frequent in Iraq. The attack may also have had sectarian motivations and comes amid a spike in sectarian violence throughout the county.
On March 7, an administrator of North Waziristan tribal agency, identified as Zaheer-ul-Islam, came under rocket attack as he traveled with his deputy, Fida Khan.  After surviving the first wave of rockets, a second wave followed with some gunfire, killing their guard and injuring two others.
On March 7, unidentified individuals blew up a gas pipeline in Mastung, causing damage to the pipeline and interrupting the supply of gas to Mastung and the surrounding areas.
Gunmen in camouflage uniforms stormed the offices of the al-Rawafid Security Company, a privately owned security firm, in Baghdad, and kidnapped 50 employees. The gunmen arrived and left in 10 to 15 cars. The Rawafid Security Company provides security to businesses and other clients, including Iraqna, a major cell phone firm in Iraq. The company is Sunni-owned and employs mostly Sunnis. The company is owned by a nephew of Sheik Ghazi al-Yawer, one of Iraq's vice presidents. Many of the employees are former members of Saddam Hussein's army. Six of the company's security guards were not taken.The attack could have had one of several motivations. First, it may have had sectarian motivations, coming amid a surge in sectarian violence in the country. In addition, attacks on private security firms, particularly those that work with the government or with US forces, are frequent in Iraq. Finally, attacks on former members of Hussein's regime are frequently targeted.Sources reported that the company had been under investigation for collaborating with the anti-government insurgency and was also operating without a license. This fueled suspicion that then men had actually been detained by the Interior Ministry.
A bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, killing two police and wounding seven people, including four police. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
An Iraqi policeman, Mousa Hameed Hussein, was killed and a police  lieutenant, Mahir Ali Hussein, was injured when gunmen opened fire on their vehicle near Kirkuk. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Sheik Ahmad Hashim Ahmad, the Sunni imam of the Al-Ahibbah Mosque in al-Zafaraniyah, was kidnapped by gunmen from the Al-Mishan Complex where he works. His body was found on March 12. Attacks on Sunni clerics are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, wounding three civilians. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A car bomb exploded near the Sunni Al-Israa Walmiraj mosque in Baghdad, killing five civilians and wounding twelve others. The attack occurred as worshippers were leaving the mosque following evening prayers. The attack likely had sectarian motivations and occurs amid a spike in sectarian violence in country.
A small bomb was detonated by a remote control outside of the official residence of Prem Tinsulanonda, the head of the Privy Council and a former prime minister.  Two tourists who were passing the residence, one Canadian and one British, were slightly injured.
A group calling itself the Angry Brigades claimed responsibility for sending two parcel bombs through the Spanish postal system.  One of the bombs targeted the sub-directorate general of the Catalan police force, Mossos d'Esquadra.  Both bombs were made of 50 grams of dynamite and  were intercepted in Barcelona and safely defused.  The Angry Brigades stated, We believe that solidarity ought not to be just remembering but also attacking.  These are times for taking a position and acting.  You decide.  Join the angry team.  For our comrades, for us, for anarchy.  Note: Incident date is approximate.
On March 9, suspected members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists detonated a bomb along the Mahendra Highway in the Bankekhola area, injuring six civilians.  The bombing came in the second day of the Maoist Bandh (shutdown) in Mahottari and Sarlahi districts.
A bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, killing two officers and wounding four. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
The Al-Quds Brigades, the armed wing of Palestinian Islamic Jihad, claimed responsibility for firing three rockets on the Israeli settlement of Ashqelon.  No damage or injuries were reported.  A reported five rockets landed in Israel on this day.
Two intelligence officers were killed by gunmen who opened fire on them in Baghdad. Attacks on intelligence and security personnel are frequent in Iraq.The attack was claimed by the Mujahideen Shura Council, an alliance of several terrorist groups including l-Qaeda in Iraq, Victorious Army Group, the Army of al-Sunnah Wal Jamaa, Ansar al-Tawhid Brigades, Islamic Jihad Brigades, the Strangers Brigades, and the Horrors Brigades.
A lieutenant colonel in the Interior Ministry Commando force was killed by gunmen who opened fire on him in Baghdad. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Two qassam rockets landed in or near the Israeli settlement of Sederot.  One local resident was treated for shock.
Gunmen opened fire on a car carrying a member of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan Party in Baghdad. All three occupants in the car were killed in the attack. Attacks on those who participate in politics are frequent in Iraq.
A coordinated attack involving three car bombs, including a suicide bomber, and mortar fire was launched against two markets in Baghdad's Sadr City neighborhood, a predominantly Shiite district. In total, the attack killed at least 58 people and wounded more than 200. The attacks occurred during the evening hours when the markets were filled with people.  A fourth car bomb was found and defused safely.Mortar rounds were fired at the Sadr City area, landing in at least two markets.NOTE: Casualty numbers are for the entire attack.
A bomb exploded near a shopping center in Tirkit. No one was injured in the attack, but material damage was caused.
A bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, wounding two policemen. Attacks in police are frequent in Iraq.
Unidentified assailants kidnapped four Albanians, along with four of their guards, in Kandahar City.  Taliban Spokesperson Dr. Hanif claimed responsibility for the kidnappings on behalf of the Taliban.  Update: On March 13, a Taliban spokesman reported that all four of the men were shot and killed, reportedly because of they were thought to be helping Americans.  The men worked for a German firm, called Ecolog, that treats water at US and Afghan military bases.  The four guards were released.Update: On March 17, a bomb exploded in the Maiwand District of Kandahar, killing nine policemen as they escorted the bodies of the four Albanians that had been kidnapped and killed by the Taliban.Note: Incident date is approximate
A car bomb exploded near a police patrol near the Rahim Awa Police station in Kirkuk, wounding four police. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol that was responding to a false report of bodies inside a store in Tikrit. Five police and one civilian were killed. A total of 18 people, including 15 police, were wounded in the incident. Police are the frequent target of attack in Iraq.
Gunmen attacked and killed Muhsin Khudhair, the editor of the news magazine Alef Ba, outside his home in Baghdad. Just hours before the attack, Khudhair attended a meeting of the Iraqi Journalists Union in which the organization urged all groups to remember the neutrality of journalists. Khudhair is the third Iraqi journalist killed in Baghdad in less than a week. Journalists are frequently targeted by insurgents in Iraq.
On March 13, unidentified assailants attacked a local television anchorperson, identified as Atiq Jalil, in Jalalabd, Nangarhar Province.  Apparently, Jalil was beaten by several people with pipes and sticks for being the son of an Englishman and for not wearing a beard.  According to station officials, this is not the first time one of their on-air personalities was threatened and told to grow a beard.
Fifteen Sunni men were shot, killed, and placed on a minibus near two Sunni neighborhoods in Baghdad. The attack comes only a week after a similar attack in the same area. The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol in Al-Huwayjah, south of Kirkuk, near an Iraqi police patrol. The attack resulted in the death of one police officer. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
The Al-Quds Brigade, the armed wing of Palestine Islamic Jihad, claimed responsibility for firing three rockets at the Israeli settlement of Ashqelon.  Israeli media reported that a total of eight rockets fell in Israel on this night.  Since Israel's withdrawal from the Gaza Strip, rocket attacks have been increasingly frequent.
On March 14 in Meherpur district suspected members of the Janajuddha faction of the Purbo Banglar Communist Party (PBCP) detonated four bombs at the home of local Union Parishad Chairman Asaduzzaman Bablu.
A car bomb exploded near a popular restaurant in eastern Baghdad, killing one civilian and wounding two others.
A car bomb exploded near an Interior Ministry patrol in Baghdad, killing one person and wounding 15 other civilians. Security personnel are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
A lorry carrying materials exploded near a police checkpoint in Kirkuk, injuring two civilians and a police officer. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq. The driver of the truck was not hurt in the blast and was detained for questioning. Officials noted he may not have known about the bomb.
An explosion occurred at a branch HSBC, a British bank, in Diyarbakir.  The blast blew out the windows at the bank and nearby shops.  Initially police were reporting two injuries, but later reports state that no one was hurt.  Authorities hinted that they believe the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) may be behind the attack.
On March 15, suspected members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists kidnapped and killed a man identified as Chure Thapa in the Dhasuwa area of Suryapura Village Development Committee (VDC).  The Maoists had accused the man of being involved in anti-Maoist activities.
A bomb exploded near a police patrol in Muqdadiyah, wounding seven police officers and killing one civilian. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A gunman opened fire on a local administration office in Pattani Province, killing six, including a television journalist.
On March 16, suspected members of the Communist Party of India-Maoists kidnapped five citizens from the Basagura area of Dantewara District after accusing them of partaking in police anti-Maoist operations.
A bomb left on a minibus in a Shiite area of Baghdad exploded, killing two passengers and wounding four others. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol in Iskandariyah, killing one policeman and wounding three others. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Unknown perpetrators attempted to derail an oil-carrying train near the town of Karabulak.  The railroad tracks at the site of the explosion received some damage and several train cars were derailed but did were not damaged and no oil spilled.  A second explosive device which failed to detonate was found at the scene.
The former police chief of Zabul Province, identified as Abdullah Khan, was killed by suspected Taliban fighters as he traveled through Zabuls Arghandab district.  An investigation is under way and three Taliban militants have bee arrested in connection with the incident.Note: Incident date is approximate
On March 17, a boy was killed by a bomb that was believed to be placed by members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists.  According to Defense Ministry officials, the bomb detonated in front of the District Health Office in the Kalaiya area of Bara district.
Gunmen opened fire on a police officer and his brother in Baiji, killing both. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on the Kurdish Communist Party center in Kirkuk, injuring one guard. Attacks on political party offices are frequent in Iraq.
The Salah el-Dein Brigades, the armed wing of the Popular Resistance Committees, claimed responsibility for firing rockets on Sederot and the Kessoufim crossing.  The attack was reportedly in response to the killing of a twelve-year-old girl by Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) during a raid in the West Bank.  Since Israel's withdrawal from the Gaza Strip, rocket attacks have been increasingly frequent.
On March 18, suspected members of the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) detonated a bomb next to a railroad track at Bamunimaidan Rail Yard in Guwahati.  The explosion did not damage the railroad tracks, but it did kill one woman and injured ten others, causing train service to be interrupted.
Gunmen attacked and killed four security personnel guarding archaeological sites in Mosul. A fifth security guard and a bystander were wounded in the attack. Attacks on security personnel are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol in Mosul, wounding two civilians. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A police officer was wounded when gunmen attacked his patrol in Mosul. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen attacked a Sunni family that had moved to Fallujah from a Shiite neighborhood of Baghdad after five members of the family had been killed by sectarian violence. A man was killed and his wife injured in the attack which likely had sectarian motivations.
On March 19, suspected members of the Communist Party of India-Maoists detonated a landmine as a police vehicle passed over it outside of the Dongargarh area of Rajnandgaon District, killing two police and injuring 13 others.
Five Shiite pilgrims walking to Karbala for the Ashura holiday were wounded when gunmen opened fire on them in Iskandariyah. The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
A suicide car bomb was detonated near a police checkpoint in Baqubah, killing one policeman and wounding two others. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded in a minibus in Baghdad which was carrying Shiite pilgrims to Karbala for the Ashura holiday, killing three and wounding four others. The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
A policeman was shot and killed as he was walking home from work.  A serviceman who happened to be nearby was injured.
On March 20, unidentified assailants bombed the transmission tower of Radio Pakistan in South Waziristan.  The tower was destroyed in the explosion, interrupting FM radio transmission.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, wounding several police officers. Attacks on police are frequent. This was one of two similar attacks which wounded five police together.NOTE: Casualty numbers are for both roadside bomb attacks in Baghdad, although they weren't coordinated.
A bomb exploded near a home in Mosul where condolences were being offered after the death of Ra'd al-Asali, an oil products official who was killed by gunmen on March 20. One person was killed and three wounded in the attack which occurred near the Qabba mosque.
A van carrying at least one Palestinian on his way to carry out a bombing in Israel was stopped by Israeli security forces after a high-speed chase on the Jerusalem-Tel Aviv highway.  Israeli officials received specific intelligence involving the van and pursued it after it left Jerusalem.  The driver of the van was transporting Palestinians who had entered the country illegally.  When the police ordered him to stop, he continued driving, inciting the chase.  Eventually the vehicle was forced to stop by roadblocks put up on the highway.  Police found ten men inside and a bag of explosives.  The individual suspected of carrying out the attack is thought to be a member of Palestine Islamic Jihad.  It is unclear if the other individuals were involved in the attack, however some suspect that the would-be-bomber did not detonate his explosives because of their presence.  Israel security forces have been on high alert, as the country's elections are only a week away.
On March 21, unidentified assailants planted a bomb underneath a 30-inch diameter gas pipeline in Doli, North West Frontier Province.  The supply of gas to Punjab was interrupted following the attack.
Gunmen shot 16 Shiite pilgrims who were traveling back from Karbala following the celebration of the Ashura holiday. Their bodies were found in Baghdad. The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen attacked a truck carrying Shiite pilgrims back from Karbala where they had just celebrated the Ashura holiday, killing one pilgrim and wounding 28 others. The attack likely had sectarian motivations. The attack was followed by an attack on the police patrol responding to the first incident, killing one police and wounding five others. Insurgents often use this type of coordinated attack on responding police patrols.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol as it responded to an attack on a convoy of civilians transporting supplies for the US military near Baqubah.  The attack on the civilians killed three truck drivers. One police officer was wounded in the attack on the police. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq. Insurgents often coordinate their attacks by attacking police patrols responding to earlier incidents.
A police patrol was attacked by gunmen in Baghdad, wounding one policeman and killing another. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attack.
On March 22, a section of railroad track leading to a National Mineral Development Corporation (NMDC) in Dantewara district was blown up by suspected members of the Communist Party of India-Maoists.  The Maoists then bombed the NMDC installation, causing heavy property damage but no casualties.  The Maoists have targeted NMDC three times since February 1.
A car bomb was remotely detonated near a police patrol in Baghdad, killing one Shiite pilgrim who happened to be passing by. Police in Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
Gunmen ambushed a police patrol convoy in Mosul as it was transporting detainees to Mosul, killing two police and wounding two others. The gunmen did not succeed in freeing the detainees. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
The convoy of Major General Ali al-Yasiri, the chief of the Baghdad police, was attacked by a roadside bomb in Baghdad. Two of al-Yasiri's bodyguards were injured in the attack, but al-Yasiri was not in the convoy at the time of the attack. Security officials are the frequent target of insurgent attack in Iraq.
An explosive device detonated in a holiday villa belonging to residents of mainland France in Pietrosella, on the island of Corsica.  The blast destroyed the home.  No group has claimed responsibility.
A bomb exploded in a bakery in Baghdad, killing four workers and wounding one other.  As police responded to the attack, a second device detonated, killing one police officer and injuring another.  Coordinated attacks that target first responders and innocent bystanders are increasingly frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded outside of the Sunni Saad Ibn Abi Wakkas mosque in Khalis as worshippers left evening prayers. The attack killed five Sunnis and wounded 17 others. The attack likely had sectarian motivation and comes amid a spike in sectarian violence in Iraq.
Gunmen kidnapped Col. Muayyad al-Mashhandani, a police commando, outside his home in Baghdad. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
The Al-Quds Brigades, the armed wing of Palestine Islamic Jihad, claimed responsibility for firing two rockets on the Israeli settlement of Ashqelon.  No damage or injuries were reported.  Since Israel's withdrawal from the Gaza Strip, rocket attacks have been increasingly frequent.
On March 24, unidentified assailants bombed two electricity transformers in Zhob, Balochistan.  The explosions destroyed the transformers and interrupted the supply of electricity to over one hundred homes in the area.
An explosive device was found in the car of Nazir Yevloyev, the head of the press service of the Ingush Interior Ministry, in Nazran. The bomb was disarmed.
A bomb exploded in a traffic police booth in Baghdad as a bus passed by. The explosion killed four civilians and wounded four other people including two policemen. The attack started when gunmen killed the traffic policeman whose booth was used for the attack.
Gunmen kidnapped police Col. Muayad Ahmad Al-Mashhadani in front of his home in Baghdad. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Palestinian militants fired at least one rocket on the Israeli city of Ashqelon.  No damage or injuries were reported.  Since Israel's withdrawal from the Gaza Strip, rocket attacks have been increasingly frequent.  As an industrial zone, Ashqelon is often targeted.
On March 24, suspected members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists attacked the Ward Police Office in the Mujaliya area of Janakpur municipality, killing two police personnel.
A roadside bomb exploded in Baghdad near a group of security contractors. Three contractors were wounded in the attack. Attacks on security contractors are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, wounding two police. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Col. Sha'ban Barzan, the chief of police in Al-Baghdadi, was the target of an assassination attempt when gunmen opened fire on his convoy in the Al-Baghdadi area. The attack led to the death of two of Barzan's  aides, including his brother who holds the rank of first lieutenant, and the injury of six other guards. Barzan was not hurt. Attacks on police officials are frequent in Iraq.
An explosive device detonated in front of the home of the chief of police of Al-Muqdad in Kirkuk. Adel Zain Al-Abdeen was not injured when the device exploded as he left his home for work. Only material damage was caused. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
On March 26, suspected members of the Communist Party of India-Maoists triggered a landmine explosion outside of Gorbinapal Village in Kanker District, killing one Central Reserve Police Force personnel and injuring another as they were patrolling the area on foot.
A bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, wounding four people including one policeman. The bomb exploded near a police car, but hit a civilian bus instead, wounding two passengers, the bus driver, and one policeman.
Insurgents threw a grenade at a police patrol in Mosul, wounding five police. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen kidnapped the President and Dean of Anbar University, Abdul Hadi Rajab al-Hitawi, from his home in Ramadi. Attacks on University professors and officials are frequent in Iraq.
A Muslim village chief was shot to death while driving his motorcycle in Yala.  His four year-old daughter, who was riding with him at the time, survived the attack.
Israeli Defense Forces fired on three Palestinian militants firing rocket-propelled grenades into Israel from the Gaza Strip.  The militants returned fire.  One Palestinian gunman was killed, the two others were wounded.  Palestine Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility for the attack.  Since Israel's withdrawal from the Gaza Strip, rocket attacks on southern Israel have been increasingly frequent.
On March 27, suspected members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists bombed the District Development Committee Office at Nepalgunj in Banke District, damaging the building but causing no casualties.
Gunmen shot and killed an intelligence officer in Baghdad. Attacks on police and security personnel are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire at a car carrying Iraqi contractors who provided construction and other services to US troops in Tikrit. The attack occurred in Tikrit and resulted in the death of two contractors and the injury of one other. Attacks on those who work with US forces are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded near an oil facility in Kirkuk, wounding five oil facility guards.  Attacks on oil facilities and their employees are frequent in Iraq. Insurgents use these attacks to disrupt a main source of income for Iraq and to undermine the new Iraqi government.
An unknown perpetrator sent an envelope  purportedly containing anthrax to Interior and Justice Minister Jesse Chacon at the Interior and Justice Ministry on Urdaneta Avenue in Caracas.  Security officials pulled the envelope out after deciding that it needed to be checked. It is now with the Prosecutor's office and other intelligence agencies.  There were no fatalities or injuries reported.
Gunmen in police commando uniforms stormed the al-Ibtikar Trading Company in Baghdad, killing eight employees and wounding six security guards. The attack comes amid a surge in violence directed at businesses in the capital. Survivors of the attack said that the attackers asked to see the company manager who was not there and identified themselves as being from the Interior Ministry. The attackers also set fire to part of the building.
Gunmen opened fire on three staffers in the Baghdad office of Shiite cleric Muqtada al-Sadr, killing all three. Those who work for and support al-Sadr who has significant religious and political influence, are frequently attacked. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen attacked a mosque in Baghdad, wounding several guards before they were repelled by residents. Attacks on mosques are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations. No exact casualty numbers were given.
A bomb exploded at the back of a Weena bus in Digos City on southern Mindanao Island just after the vehicle had parked inside the terminal. Twenty-one passengers and a vendor were injured in the blast.
Gunmen opened fire on a police patrol in Baghdad, wounding two police.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, killing one civilian and wounding two others. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad.  It missed the patrol and wounded six civilians. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A suicide car bomb exploded near a special unit of the Interior Ministry police commando force in Baghdad. The attack killed seven people and wounded a ministry official. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on Majed Hameed, a member of the Shiite Al-Dawa party, in Baghdad, killing him. Attacks on those who participate in politics are frequent in Iraq. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
A suicide bomber disguised as an ultra-Orthodox Jew detonated his explosives near the entrance to the Kedumim settlement, killing himself and four Israelis; no additional injuries were reported.  24-year old Ahmad Mahmud Masharqah hitch-hiked to the settlement carrying a ten kilogram bomb in a suitcase.  The Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade claimed responsibility for the attack. The next day, Israeli security forces arrested eight individuals suspected of being involved in the attack, including the perpetrator's brother.
In Srinagar, unidentified assailants threw a grenade at a picket of the 69 Battalion of Central Reserve Police Force in Kawdara, wounding four civilians in the attack.Note: Incident date is approximate
Three car bombs exploded around the same time in the Assyrian Market in Baghdad, killing one person and wounding seven others. The attack occurred in the Dora district, a primarily Sunni area.
Insurgents detonated a bomb under an oil pipeline in Kirkuk. No casualties were caused.  Oil pipelines and facilities are frequently attacked in Iraq. Insurgents attack the oil industry to disrupt a major source of income for Iraq and undermine the new Iraqi government.
A bomb exploded near the Al-Sulaykh Police Station. No casualties were reported. Police stations are frequently targeted by insurgent attacks.
On March 31, suspected members of the Communist Party of India-Maoists abducted the spokesperson of the Bharatiya Janata Partys (BJP) Dongergarh unit, identified as Ramchandra Sinha, from his home in Charbhata Village, shooting and killing him in the process.
The Kurdistan Freedom Hawks (TAK) claimed responsibility for placing a sound bomb at the Malatya police station.  The device was left at the entrance of a residential building and caused damages to windows and the front door.  There were no reported injuries.  In their statement of claim, the TAK stated, The Turkish people must finally realize that the responsible party for all the actions that we have conducted and will conduct is their bloody-handed Prime Minister Erdogan and his slavering triggermen.
On March 31, a group of Taliban militants attacked a police convoy returning from the Kolalgo area of Zormat District.  The police were able to repel the attack and arrest one of the assailants.  As the prisoner was being detained, he detonated the explosives that were strapped to his body, killing himself and injuring a nearby policeman.  This is reported to be the first suicide attack in the Zormat District of Paktia Province.
A bomb exploded near a police patrol near Baghdad University of Technology, killing one policeman and wounding five others. Several police vehicles were severely damaged in the attack. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
On April 1, suspected members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists attacked the police station in the Gaur area of Rautahat District, killing two policemen and injuring two others.
Palestinian militants fired at least four rockets on Israel.  No damage or injuries were reported. The Al-Nasir Salah-al-Din Brigades, the armed wing of the Popular Resistance Committees, claimed responsibility for firing three rockets on Sederot on this day.  Israeli Army radio reported that 100 rockets were fired at Israel on April 1st and 2nd.  Since Israel's withdrawal from the Gaza Strip, rocket attacks on southern Israel have been increasingly frequent.
Gunmen kidnapped Walid Sobhi Ahmed, the director of religious tourism at the Transport Ministry, in Baghdad. Attacks on those who work in government agencies are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen assassinated a Sunni sheik, Abdul-Minaam Awad, in Zobaa, west of Baghdad. Tribal sheiks are frequently attacked in Iraq for their role in local politics. The attack may also have had sectarian motivations.
An explosive device detonated near a police patrol in the Al-Sulaykh area. No injuries were caused. Police are the frequent targets of insurgent attacks.
A policeman from the district of Neftekumsk was killed in the village of Irakli in Stepanovsky district when unidentified attackers threw a grenade into his house.
On April 2, a group of suspected Taliban militants attacked a police patrol in the Nade-e Ali District of Helmand Province.  One policeman was killed in the attack and two others were injured before they were able to shoot and kill one of the assailants, causing the rest to flee.
Suspected members of the communist Party of Nepal-Maoists set fire to the District Development Committee Office in Dadeldhura District.  Officials believe that the Maoists used a pressure cooker bomb to set the fire, although no casualties were reported in the incident.Note: incident Date is approximate
Two policemen were killed when gunmen opened fire on them in Basra. Police are the frequent target of attack in Iraq.
A bomb exploded near a grocery store in Buhriz, causing damage to the buildings, but no injuries. Attacks on grocery stores sometimes occur if the store sells alcohol. Islamic extremists attack stores that sell liquor, believing that liquor sales and consumption violate Islamic law.
Gunmen killed the Imam of a Sunni mosque in Kirkuk, Sheik Omar Abdel Razeq Mohammed, when they opened fire on him in the city. Attacks on mosque Imams are frequent in Iraq and likely have sectarian motivations.
Two Iraqi security personnel guarding an oil facility in Baiji were killed and three others wounded when gunmen opened fire on them. Attacks on oil installations and oil industry employees are frequent in Iraq. Insurgents attack oil installations to undermine the new Iraqi government and disrupt one of the most important sources of income for the country.
A Shiite family of six, the al-Saadun family, was killed in Basra when gunmen opened fire on them in a market. The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
Three people were killed when unknown perpetrators threw a Molotov cocktail at a public bus in Bagcilar, Istanbul province.  The device caught fire, causing the bus to crash on the side of the road.  The attack, one of many in the region in recent weeks, prompted an anti-PKK (Kurdistan Workers' Party) protest in Istanbul.
On April 3, as the Arghandab District Police Chief (identified as Zmari) was visiting the Baba Wali shrine in Kandahar Province, a suspected suicide bomber charged toward him shouting God is Great and poking at a series of explosives that were wrapped around his body.  Before the explosives could detonate, Zmaris bodyguards shot and killed the assailant.
On April 3, two local road construction workers were kidnapped by members of the Taliban as they traveled along the Kabul-Kandahar Highway through Zabol Province.  The Taliban have since demanded the release of a captured Taliban fighter in return for the release of the two workers.
A policeman was killed in Baghdad when insurgents opened fire on him. Police are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
Two truck drivers who worked with US forces were killed when gunmen opened fire on them in Baiji. Attacks on those who work with US forces are frequent in Iraq.
A Molotov cocktail was thrown at the Turkish consulate general in Paris, France.  Witnesses spotted two unidentified individuals throwing the device at the main gate of the premises.  Only slight damage was caused to the gate.  No further information is available.
At least five rockets were fired at the Israeli city of Ashqelon.  The Al-Nasir Salah al-Din Brigades, the armed wing of the Popular Resistance Committee, claimed responsibility for firing four rockets.  The Al-Quds Brigades, the armed wing of Palestine Islamic Jihad, claimed firing five rockets on Ashqelon.  No damage or injuries were reported.  Since Israel's withdrawal from the Gaza Strip, rocket attacks on southern Israel have been increasingly frequent.  As an industrial city, Ashqelon is frequently targeted.
Gunmen opened fire at the headquarters of the Iraqna Mobile Phone company in Baghdad, killing two security guards and wounding three others. The gunmen then kidnapped the three wounded workers. Attacks on Iraqi companies, particularly those seen as supporting the Iraqi government and reconstruction are frequent in Iraq.
An Iraqi translator who worked for Polish troops in Iraq was killed when gunmen wearing police commando uniforms in Diwaniya opened fire on him and his nephew. The translators nephew was injured in the attack. Attacks on those who work with coalition forces are frequent in Iraq.
The Kurdistan Freedom Hawks (TAK) claimed responsibility for a bomb attack targeting an office of the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) in Istanbul.  The explosive device was placed in a garbage bin outside the building housing the AKP party.  The blast caused three injuries, including one party employee and major damages to the building.
A car bomb exploded near the Shiite Imam Ali shrine in Najaf, killing 15 people and wounding 30 others. Attacks on mosques are frequent in Iraq and are motivated by sectarian tension between Shiites and Sunnis.
A policeman was killed when gunmen opened fire on him near his home in Kirkuk. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A former militant was attacked by fellow  militants in downtown Bordj Menaiel. The motive for the attack was based around the victim giving up the armed struggle.  The three attackers wounded the victim, but he is expected to survive.
On April 6, members of the Baloch Liberation Army (BLA) blew up a gas pipeline in Hub, Balochistan, interrupting the supply of gas to several factories in the Lasbela Industrial Estate.  Following the incident, a spokesman for the BLA took responsibility for the pipeline bombing.
Unknown perpetrators bombed two Transmilenio buses in Bogota; one in Ingles Barrio and one in Zarzamora. There were 20 injuries and 3 deaths (including at least two children.)  There has been recent evidence of a resurgence of the FARC in Bogota and aggressive recruiting at the Universities.  The FARC have been implicated in this incident and it is supposed that it was used as a rite of passage into the urban militia groups.  The FARC have denied any involvement in an interview granted through an online news service.  The police still insist that they have identified four suspects linked to this incident who are members of the FARC urban militia, Antonio Narino Urban Network (Ruan).  Other sources: El Tiempo 7,11,13 April; Caracol TV 7 April
Three suicide bombers detonated their explosive belts around the Baratha Shiite mosque as worshippers left following Friday evening prayers in a coordinated suicide attack. The attack killed at least 90 people and wounded more than 164. The Imam of the mosque is Sheikh Jalaluddin al-Saghir, an MP with the Shiite United Alliance, the largest Shiite bloc in the Iraqi parliament. Al-Saghir was not injured in the attack. The attackers were all dressed like women. Officials believe that one of the bombers was a woman, but that the other two were men dressed in traditional female attire. One of the bombers detonated the explosives near the security post of the female section, allowing the other two bombers to penetrate into the crowd of worshippers. Another bomber detonated the explosives in the courtyard and a third tried to detonate in al-Saghirs office. Al-Saghir may have been a primary target of the attack. Among the dead were two Swedes; six Swedes were injured:  Assad Alsuheil and his son were killed in the attack and six of their relatives were injured. The family had been in Iraq visiting Iraqi relatives.
On early Friday afternoon a caravan carrying Algerian Custom officials was ambushed.  The attack led to the death of thirteen officials and injured eight others, five of which were labeled serious. No group claimed responsibility for the attack but some people feel Mokhtar Belmokhtar's group is responsible.
On April 7, unidentified gunmen shot and killed the President of Trincomalee District Tamil Peoples Forum, identified as Vanniasingham Vigneswaran, inside a bank in Trincomalee.  According to officials, Vigneswaran was about to be nominated as the national list Parliamentarian, filling a position that was left vacant by another assassination in December 2005.
A bomb exploded near a police patrol in Qasab Khanah, wounding a policeman and an officer.
A barber in Saydiya was killed when gunmen opened fire on him as he was leaving his home. Attacks on barbers are frequent in Iraq. Islamic extremists attack barbers who give Western style haircuts and shave mens faces, both of which are prohibited under Islamic law.
A bomb exploded in front of the home of a police major in Kirkuk, wounding the police major and his two sons. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
An Iraqi translator working with US forces was kidnapped in Tikrit. Those who work with US forces are frequently the targets of insurgent attacks.
Unknown perpetrators bombed two Transmilenio buses in Bogota; one in Ingles Barrio and one in Zarzamora. There were 20 injuries and 3 deaths (including at least two children.)  There has been recent evidence of a resurgence of the FARC in Bogota and aggressive recruiting at the Universities.  The FARC have been implicated in this incident and it is supposed that it was used as a rite of passage into the urban militia groups.  The FARC have denied any involvement in an interview granted through an online news service.  The police still insist that they have identified four suspects linked to this incident who are members of the FARC urban militia, Antonio Narino Urban Network (Ruan).  Other sources: El Tiempo 7,11,13 April; Caracol TV 7 April***The fatality and injuriy fields were accounted for in the first incident report.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol in western Baghdad, killing a civilian and wounding two police. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
On April 9, members of the Communist Party of India-Maoists bombed a railroad station and tracks in Bihar's Gaya District.  A large group of approximately 200 Maoists attacked the railroad station, chased away the employees, and blew up the rail station and some of the railways at the station, disrupting the flow of rail traffic.  The Maoists are reportedly responding to the arrest of one of their leaders, identified as Guddu Sharma.
Gunmen killed the Shiite owner of a grocery store in a sectarian-motivated attack. The attack occurred in Baghdad. Attacks on grocery store owners sometimes occur when the owner chooses to sell liquor, which violates Islamic law.
Gunmen in Baghdad attacked the home of police General Khazim Khalaf. Khalafs guards responded to the attack, wounding one bystander. Khalaf was not injured in the attack. Attack on police officials are frequent in Iraq.
Police Commissioner Ali Muhawdar was killed when gunmen opened fire on him as he drove to work. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A barber was kidnapped in Basra. His body was found four days later. Attacks on barbers are frequent in Iraq. Islamic extremists target barbers who shave men's faces and give western style haircuts, which they believe violate Islamic  law.
On April 10, unidentified assailants attacked a government health clinic in Badghis, shooting and killing four doctors and one driver.  Government officials blame the Taliban for the attack.
On April 10, a bomb exploded in a barber shop in Kohlu, Balochistan, killing two people and injuring 20 more.  The explosion also damaged four shops located dear the barber shop.  One suspect has been detained in the ensuing investigation.  Militants often target barber shops as they feel that Islamic law requires men to grow their beards.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol in Zafaraniya, wounding one policeman and one civilian. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen killed a policeman as he traveled to work in Karbala. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
The son-in-law of a senior official at the regional police department of Volgograd was killed when a homemade bomb hidden in a juice packet exploded while he was walking to a tobacco store.
A car bomb exploded in a market in Khalis, near a medical facility, killing two people and wounding at least 23 others.
A barber shop in Baghdad was attacked. The owner and one customer were injured in the attack. Islamic extremists attack barbers who give Western style haircuts and shave mens faces, both of which are prohibited under Islamic law.
Gunmen attacked and killed a senior regional government intelligence officer, Arkan Rifa'at, in Khanaqin. Three of the officer's bodyguards were also killed in the attack. Attacks on security personnel and government officials are frequent in Iraq.The attack was claimed by the Mujahideen Shura Council, an organization made up of al-Qaeda in Iraq, Victorious Army Group, the Army of al-Sunnah Wal Jamaa, Jamaa al-Murabiteen, Ansar al-Tawhid Brigades, Islamic Jihad Brigades, the Strangers Brigades, and the Horrors Brigades.
A policeman was killed by gunmen who opened fire on him in Mosul. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
On April 12, suspected members of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) detonated an improvised explosive device near a vegetable market in Trincomalee district.  Five people died in the initial explosion, but six more people were killed in the mob violence that quickly followed the explosion.  In addition to the dead, 38 people were injured in the blast and ensuing violence.
On April 12, suspected members of the Purbo Banglar Communist Party (PBCP) threw five bombs into a group of people gathered in Paka Village in Chuadanga District.  Two people died in the attack and four others were injured.  Following the incident, a PBCP spokesman claimed responsibility for the bombing and explained that the attack was targeting a local Bangladesh Nationalist Party Member.
The head of the Daqoq health clinic, Shehab Ahmad, was kidnapped in Ghayda village. Those who participate in local administration are the frequent targets of insurgent attack.
Gunmen killed a policeman in Mosul when they opened fire on him as he drove his sons to school. One of the sons was killed and the other was wounded in the attack. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A car bomb exploded in a marketplace in the Shiite Saba'a al-Bor neighborhood of Baghdad, killing 15 people and wounding 22 others. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen near Taji attacked three trucks carrying mobile health clinics owned by the Interior Ministry. Two drivers and six policemen protecting the convoy were killed in the attack. Attacks on police and those who support or work for the new Iraqi government are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen in police uniforms opened fire at Mahdi Hassun, a leading party official in the Iraq Islamic Party, at a checkpoint in Baqubah. No injuries were reported. Attacks on government officials and politicians are frequent in Iraq.
A suicide car bomber detonated his vehicle outside a police station in Mosul, wounding seven people including five police. Two of those wounded later died of their injuries. Security personnel at the station saw the driver coming and opened fire on him, preventing him from entering the compound. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Eleven employees of a construction firm were kidnapped in Basra. Their bodies were found in the city later in the day. Attacks on construction workers who support reconstruction projects are frequent in Iraq.
A policeman was kidnapped in Basra. His body was found three days later. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A government convoy traveling through Khost to a training site in Paktia Province was destroyed when a remote-detonated bomb exploded nearby.  Three policemen were killed and two others injured in the explosion.  Following the blast, Taliban spokesman Mohammad Hanif claimed responsibility for the incident on behalf of the Taliban.Note: Incident date approximate
On April 14, unidentified assailants threw a grenade at a Central Reserve Police Force bunker in the Amirakadal area of Srinagar.  The grenade exploded, killing two civilians and injuring ten others.  The incident was part of a string of grenade attacks in Srinagar that day.  Four different groups have claimed responsibility for the attack, including Jamiat ul-Mujahedin (JuM), Al-Mansooran, Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM), and Jammu and Kashmir Islamic Front.
On April 14, unidentified assailants threw a grenade at a Central Reserve Police Force post in the Bohrikadal area of Srinagar.  The grenade exploded, injuring two police.  The incident was part of a string of grenade attacks in Srinagar that day.  Four different groups have claimed responsibility for the attack, including Jamiat ul-Mujahedin (JuM), Al-Mansooran, Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM), and Jammu and Kashmir Islamic Front.
A member of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan Party was kidnapped by gunmen in Kirkuk. Attacks on those who are active in politics are frequent in Iraq.
On April 15, suspected Taliban gunmen attacked the car of Baghran Province Governor Abdul Majeed in Helmand Province, killing him.  Following the attack, Taliban spokesman Yousuf Ahmadi claimed responsibility for the attack on behalf of the Taliban.
Gunmen opened fire on a police station in the Al-Sulekh neighborhood in Baghdad, killing one policeman. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb in a parked car exploded in a market and near a mosque in Baghdad, killing four civilians and wounding seven others. The bomb exploded as a minibus passed by and most of those injured were passengers on the bus.
On April 16, the beheaded body of an Afghan national was found in the Saidgai area of North Waziristan.  He had been kidnapped  from Wana in South Waziristan on April 13.  A note was attached to the body warning that anybody caught spying for the US troops would meet a similar fate.
Palestinian militants fired at least three rockets at the northern Negev in Israel.  No damage or injuries were reported.  The Al-Quds Brigades, the armed wing of Palestine Islamic Jihad, claimed responsibility for firing a rocket at the Israeli city of Ashqelon (located in the Negev).   Since Israel's withdrawal from the Gaza Strip, rocket attacks on southern Israel have been increasingly frequent.  As an industrial city, Ashqelon is often targeted.
On April 16, a group of nearly 70 suspected members of the Communist party of India-Maoists stormed a police outpost in the Bijapur area of Dantewara district.  Eleven police personnel were killed in the attack, and several pieces of equipment were taken from the station.
An Iraqi Kurd who worked as a contractor with US forces was killed by gunmen in Riyad. Attacks on those who work with US forces are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb hidden in a garbage can exploded near in a market in Baghdad, wounding four civilians.
On April 17, gunmen attacked a police vehicle carrying Cabinet Minister, Speaker of the Jammu and Kashmir Legislative Assembly, and Senior National Conference Party Leader Ali Mohammad Nayak through the Tral area of Pulwama District.  Nayak sustained injuries in the attack but survived, while two of his armed guards were killed.  Following the incident, members of both Al-Aarifeen and Jammu and Kashmir Islamic Front claimed responsibility for the attack.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives outside a fast-food restaurant in a busy commercial area of Tel Aviv, killing himself and eleven others.  Two Romanians, a French tourist, and an American were among the dead.  The attack injured at least forty-nine people, including one American.  Daniel Wultz, 16, of Florida, traveled to Israel with his family for the Passover holiday.  He and his father were dining at the restaurant during the attack and were both injured by the blast.  Daniel passed away due to his injuries on 14 May.  Palestine Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility for the attack.  The bombing took place at the same restaurant that was targeted in a suicide bombing in January 2006, also claimed by Islamic Jihad, that injured twenty people.  After this attack, the owners of the restaurant hired a security guard.  The guard on duty asked the attacker to open his bag, prompting him to detonate the device before he could enter the restaurant.  The guard was reportedly injured.  The attack comes during the Passover holiday and is the most deadly attack since a double-suicide bombing in August 2004.  The newly-elected government of Hamas called the attack legitimate; however, Mahmoud Abbas, President of the Palestinian Authority, condemned it.  Israel responded by arresting more than twenty Palestinians, including the bomber's father.
A bomb placed near an electrical pole was detonated by cell phone along Paknam Road in Pattani's Muang District.  It was believed to have targeted Buddhist monks protected by a security detail who were receiving alms.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, killing five civilians and wounding 22 others, including four police. Several cars were also damaged in the attack. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on a policeman in Irbil, killing the policeman and wounding six bystanders. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
On April 18, unidentified gunmen on motorcycles shot and killed prominent Shia cleri, Fazal Hussain Alv, along with his driver as they traveled by car through Faisalabad in Punjab Province.  The government had previously  banned Alvi from speaking in public due to the incendiary nature of some of his past speeches.
A roadside bomb exploded near the Umm al-Tubul mosque in Baghdad, killing one civilian and wounding another. Attacks on religious targets and mosques are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded in Gedo, 150km west of Addis Ababa.  The explosion killed three and injured 37 others.  No group claimed responsibility for the bombing but possible culprits could be rebel groups based in Eritrea or Ethiopian opposition parties, who are protesting last year's disputed election.
On April 18, unidentified assailants blew up a gas pipeline outside of Mastung District.  The explosion interrupted the supply of gas to large areas of Mastung and Kalat Districts.
Gunmen detonated an explosive device next to a mobile phone tower used by Iraqna mobile phone company. The attack occurred in Fallujah and destroyed the phone tower. Attacks on communication infrastructure are frequent in Iraq as insurgents try to undermine the Iraqi reconstruction process.
A gunmen attacked a group of police in Kirkuk. He was arrested and his attack did not cause any injuries. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A motorcycle bomb was defused before it could explode in a marketplace in Khan Bani Sa'di.
Gunmen opened fire at a group of security personnel who were guarding electricity lines in Baghdad. Three security personnel were killed. Attacks on electricity installations and employees are frequent in Iraq. Gunmen target utilities in order to disrupt the Iraqi reconstruction process.
A homemade explosive device, made of a plastic pipe, a mix of nitrate and fuel oil, a timer and a detonating system, was found beside train tracks in Angers, in western France.  The bomb was placed at the base of a post where the high speed train passes through.  Authorities were able to safely defuse the device.
A roadside bomb was remotely detonated under a truck transporting voting ballots through a rubber field to Narathiwat's Rusoh District.  Hasnee Sunobut, an election official, was killed in the blast, and eleven others were injured.  The box containing the voting slips was also destroyed in the explosion, which damaged the ballots inside. This attack was part of a wave of violence that took place during the Senate elections in southern Thailand.
On April 19, suspected members of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) triggered a mine blast in Mahakachchikuda, injuring three civilians, including a businessman from South Korea.
Gunmen attacked a Sunni mosque in Baghdad, causing damage to the mosque and several nearby houses. The attack sparked a gun battle between the attackers, mosque guards, and residents. No one was injured in the attack. Attack on religious targets are frequent in Iraq.
A former officer in Saddam Hussein's security forces was killed in Karbala when gunmen opened fire on him outside his home. Attacks on those who served under Saddam Hussein are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen attacked and killed two Iraqis who worked as contractors on the US base in Khalis. Attacks on those who work with US forces are frequent in Iraq.
A policeman was killed by gunmen who opened fire on him in Baghdad. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Palestinian militants fired five qassam rockets on Israeli territory.  No damage or injuries were reported.   Since Israel's withdrawal from the Gaza Strip, rocket attacks on southern Israel have been increasingly frequent.
On April 20, a suicide bomber drove his car into a police vehicle in the Zarai District of Kandahar.  The bomber died in the attack, and the two policemen and their driver were injured.
Bimbolat Dzutsev, a chieftain of the Russian Cossacks in North Ossetia, was killed as he was driving up to his office in Vladikavkaz, by a masked man who exited a silver car with a machine gun.  The Ossetian Kataib al-Khoul jamaat has taken responsibility for the murder based on the fact that Dzutsev cooperated with the Russians in Chechnya and North Ossetia.
Two Iraqis working as US contractors in Qaim were killed by gunmen. Their bodies were found on a road, tortured and shot.  Attacks on those who work with US forces are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol in Mosul, killing four police and wounding two police and a civilian. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen killed Muhammad Mahmud Ismail al-Tamimi, a member of the Dawa Party, in Muqdadiyah. Attacks on those who are active in politics are frequent in Iraq.
On April 21 in Khost, an improvised explosive device was discovered hidden inside a mosque in Bakhtana.  Residents called police, who confirmed the presence of the bomb and called in the coalition forces, who were able to defuse it.
Unknown perpetrators assassinated Guyana's Agricultural Minister Satyadeo Sawh, his brother, Rajpat Rai Sawh, his sister, Phulmattie Persaud, and their security guard at the minister's residence.  The minister's wife was able to escape, and some visiting family members from Canada, two other security guards from the neighboring homes, and another brother of the minister were wounded.  Seven heavily armed men in military camouflage came into the house and shot the victims.  They also demanded money.  Sawh's assassination is the first in Guyana's history.  The security service posits that, although there was a robbery, the motive of the perpetrators was political and somehow relating to interrupting the upcoming elections.  Other sources: Georgetown Stabroek News, 23, 24 April, Georgetown Guyana Chronicle, 23 April
A roadside bomb detonated near a police patrol in Baghdad, wounding two police. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol in Mahaweel, wounding two policemen. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Two policemen were injured when a bomb exploded near their vehicle in Baghdad. The patrol car was also damaged in the attack. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
On April 22, unidentified assailants set fire to a secondary school in the Ala Sai District of Kapisa Province.  School officials blame the Taliban for the attack, which destroyed the school building, which had been just recently built.
Fourteen people were injured when bombs went off in two supermarkets in Kharkiv, located approximately a kilometer apart from each other in the Oleksiyska residential area.  The explosives were placed in lockers where bags are placed before customers go shopping.
Three mortars landed in a parking lot just outside the Defense Ministry in Baghdad's Green Zone. The attack killed seven people and wounded three others. The three wounded men were Defense Ministry employees. The blasts were caused by three of about 11 mortars fired at various locations around Baghdad. The other blasts did not cause injuries. Attacks on government buildings are frequent in Iraq.
Insurgents bombed the home of Ali Jassem al-Saadi, the mayor of Al-Mashruq. The attack wounded one of al-Saadi's sons, but al-Saadi was not injured in the attack. Attacks on local government officials are frequent in Iraq.
A policeman was killed and his father wounded when gunmen opened fire on them in Baqubah. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded near a police patrol in Kirkuk, wounding three police. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
The Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade claimed responsibility for firing a rocket on the Israeli city of Ashqelon.  No damage or injuries were reported.  The group stated that the attack was in response to Israel's killing of several Al-Aqsa commanders in Bethlehem.   Since Israel's withdrawal from the Gaza Strip, rocket attacks on southern Israel have been increasingly frequent.  As an industrial city, Ashqelon is often targeted.Note: The Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade is often viewed as the militant branch of Fatah, however the relationship between these two groups is not always clear.
In Balochistan, a suspected militant was carrying an explosive device on a public bus in Quetta when the bomb detonated unexpectedly, injuring three people.  Upon further investigation, the bomber was an Afghan man who was on his way to bomb a government installation.Note: Incident date is approximate.
On April 23, a tribal security force (known as Khassadars) was traveling to Razmak through Dungan when a group of unidentified assailants attacked them with guns.  One Khassadar was killed and two others injured in the attack.  It is worth noting that this is the first time Khassadars have come under attack in North Waziristan.  The Taliban had recently issued a declaration saying that Khassadars would no longer be spared due to their increasing involvement in anti-Taliban operations.
On April 23, an Afghan national attempted to enter a bus in Quetta.  As he did, a bomb exploded at the bus stand, injuring three people, including the Afghan national.  Police believe that the man trying to enter the bus was responsible for the explosion.
A car bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad. This was one of two bombs that exploded within 100 yards of each other, targeting two separate patrols. The attacks together wounded six people, including three police and three civilians. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq. This was one of seven bomb attacks in Baghdad on this day.On Tuesday April 25, eight people were arrested in connection with this and the other car bomb attacks in Baghdad on this day. The men were apprehended inside a mosque where they were making car bombs. Officials said that they had confessed to be being involved in the attacks.NOTE: Casualties for both bomb attacks.
A car bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, wounding three police and four civilians. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq. This was one of seven bomb attacks in Baghdad on this day.On Tuesday April 25, eight people were arrested in connection with this and the other car bomb attacks in Baghdad on this day. The men were apprehended inside a mosque where they were making car bombs. Officials said that they had confessed to be being involved in the attacks.
Gunmen killed six employees of MTC Atheer, an Iraqi mobile telephone company, in Karbala. The employees were kidnapped while entering the city and their bodies were found the following day. Attacks on mobile phone companies and employees, along with attacks on Iraq's telecommunications and utilities are frequent in Iraq as insurgents try to undermine the Iraqi reconstruction process. Insurgents are particularly hostile to companies that have ties to the government or to US forces.
On April 24, unidentified assailants threw a grenade at a polling booth located in Palhalan, but the grenade did not cause any damage.  By-elections in four Legislative Assembly Constituencies are being held in Kashmir today.
In Srinagar District, unidentified assailants threw a grenade at a Central Reserve Police Force vehicle in Khanyar.  Six police were injured in the attack and one civilian was killed.Note: Incident date is approximate.
An explosive device detonated near a police patrol in Kirkuk, wounding three policemen and killing one other. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on a police checkpoint in Salah-al-Din Governorate, sparking a gun battle. During the attack, three police officers were killed and two others wounded. Two gunmen were also killed. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen killed Ibrahim al-Hindawi, a senior judge responsible for the main court in the western Karkh sector of Baghdad. Attacks on judges are frequent in Iraq, as they are viewed as supporters of and participants in the Iraqi government.
In Assam, suspected members of the National Democratic Front of Bodoland (NDFB) threw two gas bombs at a passing train that was carrying diesel fuel through Udalguri District.  Two people were injured in the attack, but train crews were able to detach the engine from the rest of the train to avoid further attacks.
In Doda District, unidentified gunmen attacked a candidate for Parliament and State Legislative Assembly, identified as Shashi Kumar Kesari, who had lost the recent election.  Both Kesari's bodyguards were killed in the attack, though he and his family were unharmed.Note: Incident date is approximate.
On April 25, the body of a beheaded taxi driver was found in the Shavai Kainari area of South Waziristan.  According to intelligence officials, the driver was abducted in Wana a few days ago, and believe he was killed by pro-Taliban militants for suspicion of being an informant for the United States.
Six bodies were found in Karbala. The bodies showed signs of torture and all had been shot through the right eye. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, killing two civilians and wounding four others. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
An explosive charge was found and defused in the Khirnabat village.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives outside the base of the Mulinational Forces and Observers at al-Jura. Two members of the Multinational Froce were slightly injured in the attack.  This  attack is believed to be related to the attack that occurred on the same day at Al-Shaykh Zuwayd and the Dahab blasts.Nasser Khamis al-Mallahi, the leader of Sinai based extremists, was later identified as the mastermind behind the plot.  Al-Mallahi was killed in in May 2006 in a shootout with police.
On April 26, two senior customs officials, identified as Superintendent D. Bora and Inspector Mrinal Sharma, were kidnapped by suspected members of the United Achik National Front while traveling through the Baburambeel area of the West Garo Hills District.
Insurgents attacked five police checkpoints, the Buhruz police station, and an Army headquarters  in Baqubah with mortar fire and gunfire. The attacks were led by at least 100 insurgents and sparked several gun battles that ended only with the help of US troops. At least five police, two civilians, and as many as 21 insurgents were killed in the attacks. At least four police and four civilians were wounded. Ten Iraqi soldiers were also wounded and seven killed. Sources reported that 43 insurgents were also arrested. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.NOTE: Casualties for all five checkpoint attacks and the police station attack. Military casualties are not included.
Insurgents attacked five police checkpoints, the Buhruz police station, and an Army headquarters  in Baqubah with mortar fire and gunfire. The attacks were led by at least 100 insurgents and sparked several gun battles that ended only with the help of US troops. At least five police, two civilians, and as many as 21 insurgents were killed in the attacks. At least four police and four civilians were wounded. Ten Iraqi soldiers were also wounded and seven killed. Sources reported that 43 insurgents were also arrested. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
The Al-Quds Brigades, the armed wing of Palestine Islamic Jihad, claimed responsibility for firing two rockets at the Israeli settlement of Nahal Oz.  No damage or injuries were reported.  Since Israel's withdrawal from the Gaza Strip, rocket attacks on southern Israel have been increasingly frequent.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) attempted to kidnap Liliana Gaviria Trujillo, sister of former Colombian President and former secretary general of the Organization of American States (OAS), Cesar Gaviria as she arrived at her residence.  Gaviria is current President Uribe's opposition and his sister would have been a high profile kidnapping, and a potentially high profile bargaining chip for prisoner exchange.  In addition, this kidnapping could have been an attempt to make Uribe's election campaign weak by demonstrating the lack of security.  However, there have been other political commentaries that mention that the FARC realizes that by demonstrating the gravity of the security situation, they may actually be making a stronger case for Uribe's election.  The FARC, while attempting to disarm Gaviria's bodyguard, shot and killed both the bodyguard and Gaviria.  It is assumed that their intentions were not to kill Mrs. Gaviria in that moment because of the evidence of a metal box, oxygen tanks and a mattress, which authorities believe were intended for the transport of Gaviria.  Liliana Gaviria's body was found 30 minutes later close to her home.  Other sources: Bogota Semana, 08 May
An explosive device detonated near a police patrol in Fallujah, killing three police. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Two insurgents attempted to plant and detonate a roadside bomb targeting a Patriotic Union of Kurdistan party official in the Sinjar area. However, the device detonated early, killing one attacker and wounding the other. Attacks on officials in political parties are frequent in Iraq.
On April 28, unidentified assailants set fire to a primary school in Sayad District of Sar-e Pol Province.  On the same day, another school in Sar-e Pol was burned.
A Sunni policeman and his brother were kidnapped from their home in Jurf al-Sakhar. Their bodies were found later that day. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Two Iraqi brothers working for a foreign contractor were killed by gunmen who opened fire on them in Baghdad. Attacks on Iraqi's who work with foreign contractors on Iraqi reconstruction projects are frequent in Iraq.
An explosive device detonated behind the Iranian embassy in Baghdad. No damage or casualties were reported. Attacks on diplomatic targets are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol detonated in Kirkuk. However, the device missed the patrol, instead wounding one civilian and killing another. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A car filled with explosives was detonated by remote control while police responding to a report of a dead body in a parked car in Jurf al-Sakhar were investigating the car. The explosion killed one policeman and wounded two others. Attacks on individuals responding to an earlier attack are frequent in Iraq as are attacks on police.
A car bomb exploded near a police patrol in Musayyyib, killing one policeman and wounding three others. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen attacked the convoy of the Diyala police commander in Buhruz, but caused no injuries. Attacks on police officials are frequent in Iraq.
The Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta (MEND) exploded a truck bomb near the a refinery in Warri.  MEND claimed reponsibility for the attack.  According to MEND the explosion was a warning to the Chinese not to invest in Nigeria.
On April 30, unidentified assailants set fire to a group of tents that had been used as a primary school just outside of Khost.  No injuries were reported in the incident.
A bomb exploded in a market in Madain, killing four people and wounding two others. The attack occurred in a mostly Shiite area and may have had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen killed a Shiite grocer in Baghdad when they opened fire on him. The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
Two incendiary devices, made of firecrackers attached to a plastic bottle containing inflammable liquid, detonated at two friendly societies in Pamplona.  Authorities are blaming these attacks, along with another on this day, on anarchists.  At the scene of both attacks, handmade pamphlets were left.  The pamphlets read, 1 May, like the rest of the year, workers struggle.  Give capitalism stick.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, but it missed the patrol and killed one civilian and wounded one other. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Two people were killed and five injured when a bomb exploded on minibus in the main Baghdad market.
On May 2, unknown assailants set fire to a mosque, which was being used as a school, in the Kherwar District of Logar Province.  Police are currently investigating the arson, which damaged some mosque/school property, but did not cause any injuries.
In Jaffna, unidentified gunmen attacked the Udayan newspaper office on Kasthuriar Road.  Two newspaper employees were killed and several others were injured.Note: Incident date and injury figures are approximate
A bomb exploded in a popular Baghdad market in the Shiite Shula district, killing two civilians and wounding 17 other people. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives, which were hidden under civilian clothes, in a crowd of Sunni police recruits waiting to enter the Fallujah police station to apply for jobs. The attack killed 18 people and wounded at least 30 others. Attacks on new police recruits, particularly Sunnis, are frequent in Iraq.
Three dead bodies were found tortured and shot in the head in Nibai, near Dujail. The attack may have had sectarian motivations. Attacks like this are frequent in Iraq.
An explosive device detonated near the Dijlah Restaurant in Diyala Governorate. No injuries were caused by the blast, but nearby buildings were damaged.
On May 3, members of the Taliban used a remote detonator to set off a bomb placed in a car located inside the Nangarhar Provincial Governor's Office Compound in Jalalabad.  The explosion damaged a few parked cars, but did not cause any injuries.  Governor Gul Agha Sherzoi was in a meeting at the time of the explosion.  Following the blast, Taliban spokesman Mohammad Hanif claimed responsibility for the incident.
In Srinagar, a member of Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) threw a hand grenade at a police station located in Khanyar, injuring one police officer.  Following the attack, a spokesman of JeM claimed responsibility for the attack.Note: Incident date is approximate.
Gunmen attacked a police patrol in Tikrit, killing one policeman and wounding another. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded near a minibus in Hillah, killing three civilians and wounding four others.
A labor activist working with the Kurdistan Democratic Party was kidnapped. Her body was found beheaded in Kirkuk two weeks later. Attacks on those who are active in politics are frequent in Iraq.NOTE: Attack date is approximate.
An unknown attacker threw a small gasoline bomb at a group of protesters in front of Thailand's Election Commission in downtown Bangkok, but no one was injured.
Four bodies were found in Baghdad. The individuals had been kidnapped and had gunshot wounds. The attack may have had sectarian motivations. Attacks like this one are frequent in Iraq.
An explosive charge detonated near a police patrol in Baghdad, damaging two police cars, but not causing any casualties. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen kidnapped seven experts and engineers working with the North Oil Company in Kikuk. The attack occurred after the vehicle carrying the engineers and experts broke down. Attacks on the oil industry and its employees are frequent in Iraq. Insurgents use these attacks to undermine one of Iraq's key industries and disrupt its reconstruction process.The engineers and oil experts were released on May 17. The men were released without a ransom, but reported that their captors had asked them about the production and stocks of the North Oil Company.
An explosive device detonated near a police patrol in Baghdad, but missed the patrol and wounded four civilians. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb was found and defused at the Gush Etzion junction.  No damage or injuries were reported.  The junction has been targeted in the past as it is a major transfer point for civilians and soldiers.
On May 5, suspected members of the Janajuddha faction of the Purbo Banglar Communist Party (PBCP) threw caused a bomb explosion at the Gobra Bazaar in Narail.  Four people were injured in the blast.
Three police commandos were kidnapped in Mahaweel while they were traveling to work. Their bodies were found several days later in Mahawil. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol in Jurf al-Sakhar, killing two police and wounding two others. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Seven policemen were injured when they were sent to investigate a bomb blast on Ai-pase-Pa Pai Road in Narathiwat's Rangae District.  One of the officers picked up a mobile phone, which turned out to be a small bomb that partially exploded.  A group of individuals then opened fire on the officers.  Seven police were injured in the blast and ensuing firefight.
On May 6, suspected members of the Taliban attacked and killed the former Head of the Department for Promotion of Virtue and Prevention of Vice for Helmand under the Taliban's rule, identified as Mullah Samad Barakzai.  Since the fall of the Taliban, Barakzai had supported President Hamid Karzai's government.  Police say that the attack was carried out near a seminary in Quetta by men on a motorcycle.
Gunmen killed two policemen in Baghdad when they opened fire on them. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A suicide car bomb exploded outside the provincial government building in Karbala, killing 21 people and wounding 52 others. The attack occurred just as workers were returning after the weekend. The bomber set of his explosives about 300 yards from the building, as he was prevented from getting any closer by the buildings fortified walls. Several cars were also destroyed. Government buildings are the frequent target of insugent attack.
The Salah al-Din police station was attacked by about 10 gunmen who opened fire on the station after crossing the Iranian border. The policemen manning the station returned fire and were able to protect the station. The insurgents eventually fled. Attacks on police stations are frequent in Iraq.
The bodies of eight men, shot to death, were found in a garbage container in Baghdad. The attack likely had sectarian motivations. Attacks like this one are frequent in Iraq.
On May 7 in Paktika Province, unidentified gunmen attacked a government office building in Charbaran District, killing one policeman in the process.  The number of casualties suffered by the attackers was yet to be determined.
In Thoubal District, suspected members of the People's United Liberation Front (PULF) attacked the home of the Manipur Legislative Assembly Speaker, identified as Maniruddin Sheikh, in the Lilong area.  No casualties were reported in the attack.Note: Incident date is approximate.
Gunmen attacked a bus carrying Higher Education Ministry employees to work in Baghdad. The attack killed the driver of the bus and wounded a policeman on the bus who was serving as a guard. Attacks on government employees are frequent in Iraq.
An explosive charge detonated in Al-Tayaran Square in Baghdad, killing five civilians and wounding eight others. Several nearby shops were also damaged in the explosion.
Husayn Anwar, a member of the security team guarding Diyala's health department, was kidnapped by armed men. His body was found in Diyala. Attacks on those who work in local government organizations or serve as security forces for these organizations are frequent in Iraq.NOTE: Attack date is approximate.
On May 8, a group of Taliban gumen attacked a police vehicle in the Shahjoy area of Zabul Province.  Two police personnel and one Taliban fighter were killed in the ensuing altercation.  Four Taliban militants were injured in the attack.  Following the event, Taliban spokesman Yousuf Ahmadi claimed responsibility for the attack.
In Kapisa Province, unidentified assailants set fire to the Abdorrashid Shahid Middle School in the Pachghan Valley area of Najrab District.  The fire destroyed the building and destroyed much of the school's materials.  Another school in Najrab District was also set on fire that day.Note: Incident date is approximate.
Two caterers who worked as food suppliers for the Iraqi Army were kidnapped in Tikrit. Attacks on those who work with the Iraqi Army are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen attacked and killed Judge Muhaimin Mahmoud Abbod in Baghdad. Attacks on judges are frequent in Iraq. Judges are often viewed as government collaborators.
On May 9, a police patrol car was hit by a roadside bomb as it traveled through the Andar District of Ghazni Province.  Three policemen were wounded in the explosion.
At least one rocket landed near the Israeli settlement of Sederot.  No damage or injuries were reported.  The Al-Quds Brigades, the armed wing of Palestine Islamic Jihad, claimed firing three rockets at Sederot on this day.  The Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade also claimed firing rockets on Sederot.  Since Israel's withdrawal from the Gaza Strip, rocket attacks on southern Israel have been increasingly frequent.Note: The Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade is often considered the military wing of Fatah, however the relationship between the two groups is not always clear.
Gunmen in Baghdad stopped the car of the director of the Defense Ministry's public relations office, Mohammed Musaab Talal al-Amari, and shot him. Al-Amari was killed in the attack and one civilian was wounded. Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.
Eleven employees of the state-run Diyala Electronics Company were killed and six others injured in a coordinated attack on a minibus carrying the employees to work and another group of employees who responded to the first attack. Government employees are the frequent target of insurgent attack.In the first part of the attack, gunmen stopped a company bus carrying employees, forced the women off, and shot the men. They then placed a bomb on the bus which exploded when rescuers from a second company bus arrived to help. Gunmen frequently use coordinated attacks to target those who respond to a earlier attack. NOTE: Casualty numbers include both attacks.
Gunmen killed Ibrahim al-Khazraji, a leader in the Badr Organization, a Shiite organization. The attack occurred in Khazraj village, near Dujail, when gunmen opened fire on al-Khazraji. The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen killed a leading Sunni Imam, Sheik Khaled Ali Obeid al-Saadoun, and two of his associates in Zubayr, as they left a mosque following evening prayers. Al-Saadoun was also a local leader in the Iraqi Islamic Party. Attacks on Sunni clerics are frequent in Iraq and have sectarian motivations. In response to the attack, Shiite leader Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani issued an edict for mosques in the Zubayr area to close from Thursday May 11 through Sunday May 14 to protest the killings and other attacks against religious targets in the area.
A bomb concealed in a motorcycle in Pattani was detonated by cell phone near the Lim Kor Nia Shrine, killing two and injuring more than twenty.
Unknown perpetrators on a motorcycle (two men) shot and killed mayoral candidate Jose Enrique Rojas Rico. Rojas Rico was a candidate in the Funza Municipality for Uribe's party, Cambio Radical.
Gunmen ambushed and killed a police colonel in Kirkuk. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Two Sunni civil defense authority workers were killed by gunfire in Baghdad. Attacks on those who work in the local government organizations are frequent in Iraq. The attack may also have had sectarian motivations.
A bomb exploded in a market in Baghdad, near the Abu Jafar al-Mansur statue, killing five people.
On May 11, members of the Baloch Liberation Army (BLA) set off a set of five explosives at the Police Training College shooting range in Quetta.  The explosions all occurred in rapid succession just as the Anti-Terrorist Force was entering the facility to take firing practice.  Six police personnel were killed and 13 others were injured in the explosion.  Following the blast, a spokesman for the BLA claimed responsibility for the attack.
Oil tanks at a privately-held oil company were set on fire near the Braguny railroad station in the Gudermesskiy district.  Four oil trucks and two oil trailers burned down and a railway oil tank sustained serious damage.
Gunmen attacked an killed Mohammed Nasser, a senior local official in Saddam Hussein's Baath Party, when they opened fire on him in Mahmudiyah. Attacks on those who served under Saddam Hussein are frequent in Iraq.
An explosive charge detonated near the home of Allawi Aziz Abd-al-Hassan, a member of the protection force responsible for protecting the facilities of the Ministry of Justice in Kut. The house was damaged in the attack. Attacks on security personnel and those associated with the government are frequent in Iraq.
Kamal Jalal Hassan, a leader in the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan Party, was killed when he and a colleague, Ahmed Khorshed,  a member of the Haweija municipal council, were ambushed outside the party office in Haweija. Khorshed was injured in the attack. Attacks on political officials and members of local governments are frequent in Iraq.
Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) found and defused a bomb near the security fence surrounding the northern Gaza Strip.  No damage or injuries were reported.
An explosive device detonated at an office of the EDF electricity company in Porto-Vecchio, on the island of Corsica.  This was one of three explosive attacks to take place on the island on this night.  These attacks come one day after the Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC) claimed responsibility for a number of attacks on the island and vowed to continue their campaign of violence against the French state.  On 13 June, the Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC)- Union of Combatants, claimed responsibility for this attack as part of its night of bombings.  The group said that its struggle was the, only way to confront.the brutality and authoritarianism of the French government.
Idrees Shihatha, a tribal Sheikh in Mosul, was killed when gunmen opened fire on him in Mosul. Attacks on tribal leaders are frequent in Iraq. These attacks usually have either political or sectarian motivations.
Gunmen opened fire at a group of construction workers who were lining up to find day labor jobs in Baghdad, killing one and wounding two others.
Four humanitarian workers were kidnapped in Baghdad. Their bodies were found shot the next day. The attack may have had sectarian motivations. Gunmen also frequently target those who support the reconstruction process.
Six Shiite shrines were attacked by bombs in and near the town of Wajihiya, near Baqubah. No injuries were caused, but the shrines were damaged. The attacks likely had sectarian motivations.The Imam Abu Habib shrine was attacked.
On May 13, an unidentified gunmen attacked the head of the Investigation Section of the Intelligence Department, identified as Mohammad Soleman, as he walked down a street in Lashkargah.  Soleman was killed and two friends that he was walking with were injured in the attack.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, killing five Iraqis and injuring four others, all civilians. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Two suicide car bombs exploded simultaneously in a group of people congregating in a parking lot just outside the Baghdad airport, near the Victory Base checkpoint. The attack may have  targeted the Iraqis in the parking lot or the convoy of Electricity Minister Abd-al-Hassan Shalash, that was nearing the checkpoint at the same time. The attack killed 14 people and wounded six others. Shalash was not injured in the attack.
Gunmen kidnapped Ma'adh al-Jumayli, the son of the imam of the Al-Zaytun mosque, in Diyala governorate. One child was killed and two wounded during the abduction. The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
The bodies of three members of the Islamic movement known as Islamic Mercy in Karbala, were found in Karbala. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen kidnapped the owner of a gas station in Al-Shirqat. Attacks on the oil industry, its workers, and gas stations are frequent in Iraq. Gunmen use these attacks to undermine one of Iraq's major industries and disrupt the reconstruction process.
On May 14, two bombs exploded within minutes of each other in Baghlan, injuring seven people, including four policemen and three civilians.  Although no arrests or claims have been made, officials suspect the Taliban to be involved.
Gunmen attacked and killed six members of the same family in Mosul. The attack likely had sectarian motivations. The gunmen who carried out the attack left a bomb targeting police who responded to the attack. The follow-on explosion killed one policeman and wounded two others. Insurgents frequently use this type of coordinated attack to target police.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police headquarters in Mahaweel, killing one civilian and wounding one other. Attacks on police targets are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded near a police car, wounding one police officer in Iskandariyah. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Kazim Yahya al-Fatlawi, an officer in the former Iraqi Army and former member of the Baath party, was killed in front of his home in Karbala. Attacks on those who served under Saddam Hussein are frequent in Iraq.
The home of Mosbat Ahdab, a parliamentary deputy, was attacked by gunmen.  No damage or injuries were reported; the tactic and weapon used are unknown.   The home of Abdullah Farhat, another parliamentary deputy, was attacked in Beirut on this same day.  Both men are members of the anti-Syrian majority in Lebanon's parliament.  Since the assassination of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri in 2005, anti-Syrian lawmakers and journalists have been the target of attack.
On May 15, suspected Taliban gunmen attacked the Khakrez District Authorities offices, killing one policeman and injuring two others.  Officials believe that some of the attacking Taliban were injured as well, but exact figures are not known.
On May 15, unidentified assailants threw a grenade into the Asiyab-e-Gorg Girls' Middle School in Chemtal District.  The explosion injured one teacher and caused hundreds of students not to report to school the following day.
Gunmen attacked a minibus carrying Iraqis who work at a US military base in Taji with gunfire as the bus drove the workers home in northern Baghdad. Four people were killed and eight wounded in the attack. Attacks on those who work with US forces are frequent in Iraq.
Eighteen people were killed and 37 injured in a coordinated attack on a parking lot near a market in the Shaab neighborhood in Baghdad. Gunmen first attacked and killed five Shiite guards in a parking lot near the market. When people in the market responded to the attack, a car bomb parked near an oil tanker detonated, causing the tanker to explode, killing 14 others and wounding 37.The attack appeared to have sectarian motivations. Coordinated attacks like this one are frequently used by insurgents to maximize casualties.
Gunmen killed a policeman who worked in Interior Ministry intelligence when he they opened fire at the policeman in Baghdad. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen attacked and killed Abbas Ali Dhahe, a Shiite and the deputy dean at Mustansriya University's school of management and economics in Baghdad. Dhahe was killed along with two of his bodyguards. A third bodyguard was injured in the attack. The attack may have had sectarian motivation. Attacks on university professors and deans are frequent in Iraq.
On May 16, suspected members of the Communist Party of India-Maoists detonated a landmine underneath a traveling wedding party in Gadchiroli District.  The group was traveling between Halebada and Patha Village when the landmine exploded underneath their jeep, killing all 12 people inside.  Police officials believe that the Maoists mistook the vehicle for a police convoy due to the type of vehicle (jeep) and time of day (early morning).
Gunmen shot and killed a bakery owner when they attacked the bakery in Baqubah. The attack may have had sectarian motivations. In a coordinated follow-on attack, a bomb exploded near the police patrol responding to the incident, killing two policemen and one civilian. Eleven people were wounded in the coordinated attacks. Insurgents frequently use this type of coordinated attack to target police responding to attacks.
A bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, wounding two police. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, wounding four police and two civilians. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen attacked a group of members of the Iraqi National Dialogue Front, killing one member, identified as Hatim al-Mawla. The attack occurred in Baghdad. Attacks on those active in politics are frequent in Iraq.
The Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade claimed responsibility for firing four rockets at the Israeli settlement of Sederot.  The group also claimed firing rockets on Ashqelon and the Kerem Shalom crossing on this day.  No damage or injuries were reported.  Since Israel's withdrawal from the Gaza Strip, rocket attacks against southern Israel have been increasingly frequent.    Note: While the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade is often linked to Fatah, the relationship is not always clear.
On May 17, two United Nations mine clearance vehicles were traveling east of Kandahar when a suicide bomber drove his car into the lead UN vehicle.  The explosion killed the bomber and damaged the UN vehicle, but did not cause any injuries to the UN staff.
Dzhabrail Kostoyev, Deputy Interior Minister of Ingushetia, died along with his driver and body guard when a bomb exploded while their convoy was driving by.  The bomb was mounted in a car parked by the roadside.  Four more deaths resulted from the accident when a car with four civilians crashed into Kostoyev's car following the explosion.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, killing three police officers and five civilians. Nine people were wounded in the attack. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen attacked Shaykh Fa'd al-Shammari, a member of the Najaf city council and the Najaf representative of the Dawa party, in Najaf. Two of al-Shammari's bodyguards were wounded in the attack. Attacks on local political officials are frequent in Iraq.
A holiday villa was the target of an explosive attack in Olmeto, on the island of Corsica.  No further information is provided.
The Colombian authorities believe that the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) are responsible for four coordinated bomb attacks in Buenaventura. In this incident, an explosive was detonated at a Police Immediate Attention Center (CAI) where one policemen was wounded.  The other bomb attacks were carried out in the same city and in the same time frame at court offices and two commercial centers.  There were no casualties reported for those attacks. However, there were other press reports on attacks in Buenaventura by the FARC in the same time period.  It is not clear whether these attacks are additional attacks or correspond to the above mentioned attacks.Sources: El Tiempo, 19May, Caracol Colombia Radio 20MayThe Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) detonated bombs injuring 16 people and causing damage to buildings.  There have been several FARC attacks in Buenaventura to interrupt the election campaign.  According to reports, FARC hired children between the ages of 8 and 12 to throw the grenades at selected targets.  The children were allegedly paid 20,000 pesos each.Reports have also mentioned that Valle del Cauca governor Angelino Garzon said that 26 people had died in the recent violence in Buenaventura.
Maruding Chedo, a police officer, was severely injured when he parked by a police booth in Pattani and inadvertently detonated a bomb likely planted under his pick-up truck while it was parked at his house.
Gunmen detonated a roadside bomb outside of the home of Lt. Col. Khairalla Abdul Zahra in Baghdad. Zahra was not home at the time of the attack, but the blast wounded five members of his family, including his wife and at least two children. In a coordinated follow-on attack, a bomb exploded as a police patrol responded to the first incident, but caused no injuries. Attacks on police are frequent. Insurgents frequently use this type of coordinated attack to target police patrols.
The Al-Fatah al-Mubin Troops, a previously unknown faction, claimed responsibility for firing two rockets on a settlement near Ashqelon.  No damage or injuries were reported.  The group issued a statement stating that it is independent of similar militant groups, yet the leaflets distributed resemble leaflets regularly issued by the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades.
On May 19, unidentified assailants blew up a section of railroad tracks between Quetta and Chaman.  The explosion occurred in the Faqirabad area, interrupting train service between Quetta and Chaman.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia have been conducting continued operations over the last week in Buenaventura to interrupt elections.  This attack was aimed at an electricity pylon which was bombed.  There were no casualties associated with this attack, but the residents have been without electricity for two days.
A suicide car bomb was detonated near a police station in Al-Qaim near the Syrian border, killing five people and wounding ten others. The casualties included both civilians and police.
On May 20, suspected members of the Communist Party of India-Maoists removed a steel plate the held two railroad tracks together between Kamlur and Bhanis stations in Dantewara District.  The damage caused seven cars of a train carrying iron-ore to derail.  The incident was one of three simultaneous Maoist attacks in Dantewara that day that were designed to insure that local institutions respect the two day strike called for by the Maoists.
In Balochistan, a bomb planted on a bicycle by unknown miscreants exploded outside the Pir Abdullah Shah Bukhari shrine in Hub, injuring 9 people in the blast.Note: Incident date is approximate.
Two bombs exploded in quick succession in a fruit market in Baghdad, killing three civilians and wounding 23 other people. The attack may have targeted a group of police in the area or may have been a sectarian motivated attack.
A member of the Al-Madain council employee, Safa Ali, was shot by gunmen who opened fire on him as he drove to work. Attacks on municipal council employees are frequent in Iraq.
A policeman was kidnapped in Fallujah. His body was found several hours later. Police later arrested five suspects in the kidnapping and killing. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
On May 21, unidentified assailants disguised themselves as uniformed police officers and attacked a Youth Congress rally at Sher-e-Kashmir Park in Srinagar.  Seven people were killed in the attack, including the two perpetrators, and 25 others were injured.  The incident occurred just minutes before Chief Minister Ghulam Nabi Azad was scheduled to arrive at the rally, and just three days before the Prime Minister was scheduled to visit the area.  Following the attack, both Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) and Al-Mansooran claimed responsibility for the incident.
Suding Maeroh, a village defense volunteer, was shot in the face with a 9mm pistol and died instantly while riding his motorcycle on the Mayo-Thung Yang Dang Road between his house in Lubohyirai and a tea shop in Pattani's Mayo District.
On May 22, members of Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) threw a grenade at police in the Barbashah area of Srinagar, injuring eight people in the blast.   The attack was part of three separate grenade attacks carried out by JeM in Srinagar that day.  Following the incidents, a spokesman for JeM claimed responsibility for the attacks, which injured a total of 34 people.
Gunmen killed Col. Basheer Qadoori, a colonel in the Samarra police department, when they opened fire on him in Samarra. One of the attackers was injured in the incident and was arrested by the police. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, wounding two civilians. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded near a police patrol in Jbela, killing three people and wounding six others.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Two members of the Infrastructure Protection Force, which protects oil pipelines and other utilities, were wounded when a roadside bomb exploded near their patrol on the road between Bayji and Al-Sharqat. Attacks on the security personnel who guard utilities are frequent in Iraq. Insurgents use these attacks to undermine the Iraqi reconstruction process.
Muhammad Munir and Iqbal Mathu, both Pakistanis working for KBR in Baghdad to support US troops, were killed when gunmen launched rockets at the building they were sleeping in. One of the men was laborer and the other an electrician. The men were supporting US forces. Attacks on those who support US forces are frequent in Iraq.
On May 22, the Helmand Province Police Chief, Abdorrahman Saber, and several senior colleagues were traveling from Baghran to Musa Qala when their convoy came under attack by Taliban gunmen.  Three policemen were killed in the attack and six others were wounded, though Saber escaped unharmed.  Following the incident, Taliban spokesman Yousuf Ahmadi claimed responsibility for the attack.
In Hyderpora, a suicide bomber blew up his explosive-filled car near Hyderpora Airport Road just as a Border Security Force patrol was passing by.  The explosion killed the suspect and injured approximately 25 Border Security Force personnel.  Following the attack, Hizbul Mujahideen (HM) claimed responsibility for the incident.Note: Incident date is approximate.
A car bomb exploded near a police commando patrol in Baghdad, killing five people, including two police commandos and three civilians, and wounding eight other people. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Several mortars were fired at the Green Zone in Baghdad, which houses government buildings and US headquarters. One mortar landed near the Defense Ministry building, killing one person and wounding four others. Attacks on government buildings are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded in a Baghdad bakery, killing four people and wounding twelve others. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
Suspected members of the Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK) staged an explosive attack on a natural gas pipeline belonging to the Turkish Petroleum Pipeline Corps (BOTAS).  Damages were caused to the pipeline but there were no reported casualties.  On 26 May, the PKK officially claimed responsibility for this attack.
A bomb exploded near a crowd of workers seeking day labor jobs in Baghdad. The attack occurred among a crowd of Shiite men and likely had sectarian motivations. Attacks like this one are frequent in Iraq. The attack injured several people, but caused no deaths. Exact casualty figures were not given.
Gunmen shot and killed a university professor in Baghdad. Attacks on professors are frequent in Iraq.
A car bomb exploded near a joint US-Iraqi police checkpoint in Fallujah. The attack wounded four Iraqi policemen. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed Sheikh Fawaz Daham Heleil, the chief of the Abu Fahd tribe, near Ramadi in the town of Heseiba. Attacks on tribal chiefs are frequent in Iraq. Tribal leaders are often involved in local government affairs and are sometimes viewed as government collaborators. Other times, the attacks have sectarian motivations.
On May 24, unidentified gunmen shot and killed a People's Democratic Front activist in the Wahtrahal Budgam area of Budgam District.
On may 24, a group of suspected Communist Party of India-Maoists bombed a school building located in the Meghania area of Chatra District.  No casualties were reported in the attack.
While on his way to a market, Kortay Mayeng, the village head in Sawor, was shot and killed in his pick-up truck on Narathiwat's Rueso-Raman road by two attackers on a motorcycle.
A bomb exploded inside a building in Tahrir Square in Baghdad, killing three people and wounding 11 others.
Gunmen attacked and set fire to an Iranian truck and kidnapped the driver on the Al-Miqdadiyah-Khanaqin highway. Truck drivers bringing important supplies into Iraq are the frequent target of insurgent attacks.
Gunmen stormed a wedding party in Muqdadiyah and kidnapped the groom, Khudayr al-Tamimi, his cousin, uncle, father, and one other guest. The five were found beheaded the following day. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
On May 25, suspected members of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) attacked the Murunkan Police Post in Mannar District, injuring one police personnel in the process.
On May 25, armed Taliban gunmen stormed the house of a Jaghori District Police Officer in Qara Bagh District, shooting and killing him in the attack.  At the scene, a note was found warning government employees to quit their jobs.  Following the incident, a Taliban spokesman claimed responsibility for the attack and explained that the officer had been killed for spying for the American forces.
A bomb exploded in an outdoor market in the al-Baiyaa neighborhood in Baghdad, wounding 20 people. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
A member of the Shiite Mahdi Army militia, loyal to Muqtada al-Sadr, was found dead in Suwayra, with signs of bullet and torture wounds. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen in Baghdad attacked the motorcade of Human Rights Minister Wijdan Mikhail with gunfire. Mikhail was not in the convoy at the time of the attack. No one was injured in the attack. Attacks on government ministers are frequent in Iraq.
On May 26, unidentified assailants placed two bombs along two large gas pipelines in Balochistan.  The bombs exploded nearly simultaneously, with one exploding in the Sui area.  The blast caused a fire which quickly engulfed the Sui Bazaar area.  More than 60 shops were destroyed, along with the Sui grid station, and a police station.  Despite the damage, no casualties were reported.
Suspected Taliban gunmen shot and killed a local carpet trader in the main market of Miranshah after accusing him of being a spy for the government.
A bomb exploded near a bus station and a market in Baghdad, killing four people and wounding at least 15 others. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
Three police officers were wounded when a car bomb exploded near their patrol west of Baqubah. One civilian was also injured in the attack. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A police officer was shot and killed in Tikrit.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on a police patrol in Baghdad, wounding 10 policemen. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on a former, Baath era army officer in Baqubah, Mohammed al-Anbaky killing him and a relative. One other relative was kidnapped in the attack and Anbakys wife was left in the middle of a road near Baqubah. Attacks on former members of Saddam Husseins regime are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on a police patrol in Kirkuk, killing one officer and wounding three others.
Three bombs exploded in Jijiga, Ethiopia in what appeared to be a coordinated attack.  The attack left a total of 42 people injured, 23 are in serious condition.One bomb exploded at the Central Hotel around 8PM.In recent months bombings have become more frequent, especially in the capital Addis Ababa as the overall security situation in East Africa deteriorates.
An unidentified individual opened fire on the headquarters of the Commission for the Promotion of Virtue and Prevention of Vice in Riyadh.  No one was hurt in the attack, as employees were outside of the building performing their prayers.  The individual was able to escape after firing at least nine bullets into the building.  The Commission for the Promotion of Virtue and Prevention of Vice is Saudi Arabia's religious police.  Members enforce dress codes and sex segregation, and ensure that prayers are said on time.
A car bomb detonated near the convoy of the head of the Diyala provincial council, Ibrahim Bajilan, near Baqubah in Imam Weis. One of Bajilans bodyguards was killed and six injured in the attack. Bajilan was not hurt. Attacks on local government officials are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen killed four policemen when they ambushed their patrol in Khanaqin. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded near a coffee shop in Baghdad, killing one person and wounding ten others. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
On May 28, members of the United National Liberation Front (UNLF) killed a boy in the Meitei Leikai area of Churachandpur.  After the incident, the UNLF claimed responsibility for the killing and explained the boy was killed for his participation in anti-party activities.
A bomb exploded in Khalis inside a minibus carrying Iraqi workers who worked at the Ahsraf base of the Mujahedeen Khalq (MEK) which opposes the Iranian regime and is made up mainly of Iranian dissidents living in Iraq. The attack killed 13 people and wounded 15 others. All were workers being driven from Baqubah to the MEK base. The MEK group released a statement blaming Iran for the attack.
A bomb exploded in a parked minivan near the entrance to a market in Kazimiyah, a district of Baghdad. Seven people were killed and 20 wounded in the attack. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
A suicide car bomber detonated his explosives near a police patrol in Baghdad, wounding two police and killing one other. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A Police Intelligence Officer was killed in Al-Muthanna when gunmen attacked him in front of his home. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Sotero Llamas, a longtime former leader of the communist New People's Army (NPA), a guerrilla group, in the Bicol District southeast of Manila, was shot dead by motorcyclists while in his car in Tabaco City. His driver was also injured.
Gunmen killed the Sunni preacher of a mosque in Baghdad. Attacks on religious figures are frequent and often have sectarian motivations.
A car filled with explosives was found near a market in Husseiniyah, where an earlier car bomb had detonated, killing 25 people and wounding 65 others. The interrupted attack may have been intended as a coordinated follow-on attack.
Four people were injured when an improvised explosive device (IED) exploded in downtown Boumerdes.  The IED was detonated remotely using a cell phone, the first time that this tactic has been used according to local authorities. Another dummy IED was found near the scene.  It is believed that the bombers wanted people to flee from the dummy IED towards the 'real' IED; however the real IED detonated before the dummy IED was spotted.Authorities believe that the Salafi Group for Call and Combat (GSPC) is responsible though no claim was made.
Militants from the Al-Quds Brigades, the armed wing of Palestine Islamic Jihad (PIJ), fired a rocket on the Israeli city of Ashqelon.  No damage or injuries were reported.  The group claimed that the attack was in response to the killing of five PIJ militants by Israeli forces.   Since Israel's withdrawal from the Gaza Strip, rocket attacks on southern Israel have been increasingly frequent.  As an industrial city, Ashqelon is often targeted.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) are sus[ected of carrying out a bomb attack on Alvaro Uribe's campaign headquarters in Buenaventura.  One policemen was wounded after two explosives were thrown at the building.
Sixteen bodies, bound and with gunshot wounds, were found in the Baladiyat district of Baghdad. They were just some of the 42 bodies found throughout Baghdad on this day. The attack may have had sectarian motivations. Attacks like this one are frequent in Iraq.
The convoy of Muaid al-Jouburi, a Defense Ministry advisor, was attacked by gunmen in Baghdad. Al-Jouburi was not injured in the attack, but three of his bodyguards were wounded. Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, wounding two police. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
On May 31, a prominent religious scholar, identified as Mawlawi Abdol Hakim, was attacked by unknown assailants in the Kajaki District of Helmand Province.  Hakim died in the attack.
A bomb exploded in a vegetable market in Baqubah, injuring one civilian.
Gunmen opened fire on a policeman in Karbala, killing him. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
On June 2, unidentified assailants used a remote-controlled device to detonate a bomb underneath a patrolling police vehicle in Bajaur District.  The explosion killed one police officer and injured two others.
Two bombs hidden in paper bags exploded in quick succession in the al-Ghazil pet market in Baghdad. The bombs were placed at the entrance of the market which is open every Friday. The attack killed five and wounded 57 others.
Gunmen opened fire on the deputy commander of the oil protection force, Col. Ziyad Tariq, and his bodyguards, in Kirkuk, killing Tariq and one bodyguard and wounding another bodyguard. The attack occurred as the men left a restaurant in Kirkuk. Attacks on oil industry employees and security guards and on the oil industry itself are frequent in Iraq. Gunmen use these attacks to undermine the reconstruction process and disrupt one of Iraq's most profitable industries.
The Kurdistan Freedom Hawks (TAK) claimed responsibility for a major bomb attack in the port city of Mersin.  The blast was caused by a grenade which was remotely detonated with a mobile phone.  Fifteen people were injured by the bomb, which was planted in front of a buffet.
Police in Baqubah found the heads of eight Sunni men, including Imam Sheikh Abdel Aziz al-Mashhadani. A note left in the box with the heads said that the execution of these eight men was retaliation for the killing of four Shiite doctors and a former government employee. The note accused Sheikh al-Mashhadani of killing the five Shiites. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
A car bomb exploded near a mosque in Dujail, wounding six people. Attacks on religious institutions are frequent in Iraq.
Unidentified persons using an RPG-26 grenade launcher fired an explosive at Ingush Interior Minister Beslan Khamkhoyev's house, with no injuries resulting.
Gunmen opened fire on a minibus carrying telecommunications employees in Baghdad, killing four and wounding two others. Attacks on those who work in the telecommunications industry and on the telecommunications industry itself are frequent in Iraq. Insurgents used these attacks to disrupt the reconstruction process in Iraq.
Seven bodies were found in the Karradah neighborhood in Baghdad. The bodies were shot in the head and the chest. The attack may have had sectarian motivations. Attacks like this are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen on a motorcycle shot Muntaha Ali and her husband Helmi Yaseen, both employees of a US government agency, killing both of them in Basra. Attacks on those who work with US forces in Iraq are frequent.
Palestinian militants fired four rockets on the Israeli settlement of Sederot, two of which hit the town.  No damage or injuries were reported.
Gunmen stopped a bus carrying students in Baghdad and opened fire on it, killing eleven students. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen on a motorcycle opened fire on a group of police in Mosul, killing one and wounding four others. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on the car of a district officer for the Khan Bani Sa'd area in Baqubah. The officer was not in the car, but his driver and three sons were killed in the attack. Attacks on local government officials and their families are frequent in Iraq.
Insurgents detonated an explosive device near the Imam Dadah Wali Shiite shrine in Balad Ruz. No casualties were caused. Attacks on religious institutions are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A bomb detonated at the house of Mayor Dennis Pineda in Lubao, Pampanga.  The mayor is an ally of President Gloria Arroyo.  It is unknown if there were any casualties.  This bombing is believed to have been coordinated with at least two others around the independence holiday and was claimed by a group known as Taong Bayan at Kawal.
In Andar District, a suspected suicide bomber died when the explosives wrapped around his body exploded prematurely in Band-e Sarda.  Police believe the intended target was a convoy of Turkish road construction engineers and workers, but the exact target is unknown.  The bomber died in the explosion, but no other injuries were reported.Note: Incident date is approximate.
Police found nine heads, all from men, placed in fruit boxes in Hadid. The attack may have had sectarian motivations. This is the second such discovery in Iraq in less than one week.
A bomb exploded near the al-Mashtal station where buses pick up passengers in Baghdad. The attack wounded one person and caused damage to several cars.
Gunmen attacked a group of students at Baghdad University School of Business and Administration, killing one, wounding one, and kidnapping three others. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
Jaraewat Khamnoei and Mongkhon Prasuk, two soldiers on motorcycles protecting a convoy of schoolteachers, were shot dead by a ten man ambush in Yala.
On June 7, unidentified assailants set fire to the Shahid Gholam Faruq Middle School in Charbolak District.  The school building and equipment were destroyed in the fire, leaving 400 students without a school.  Police have arrested two suspects in connection with the case.
A bomb was planted in the Birkhadem neighborhood of Algiers.  The bomb was spotted by a citizen who then alerted the police. The police diffused the bomb before it could explode. The authorities believe that the Salafist Group for Call and Combat (GSPC) was involved but there was no claim of responsibility.
A car bomb targeting a police patrol exploded in Baghdad, killing one civilian and wounding four others. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, killing two police and wounding three others. Another bomb exploded soon after, in a coordinated attack on responding firefighters. One firefighter was killed in the second explosion. Attacks on police are frequent. Coordinated attacks like this one are also frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen kidnapped Hussein Ayham, an engineer from an oil company, on the Tikrit-Kirkuk road. Attacks on those who work in the oil industry and on the oil industry generally are frequent in Iraq. Insurgents use these attacks to undermine one of Iraq's most profitable industries and disrupt the reconstruction process.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol in Kirkuk, killing a police captain and wounding eight others, including five civilians. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Five policemen were killed and three others were injured when a roadside bomb detonated by mobile phone struck two trucks on their way to escort teachers home from the Baan Ruesoh School in Narathiwat's Ruesoh District.
On June 8, a group of unidentified gunmen attacked a vehicle carrying aid workers from the Coordination of Humanitarian Assistance organization through Balkh province.  One aid worker was killed in the attack.   Coordination of Humanitarian Assistance works in the fields of health, agriculture, and education.
A car bomb exploded near a police patrol in the New Baghdad area of Baghdad, killing two police and four civilians and wounding 11 others. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A car bomb exploded in a market in eastern Baghdad, killing six people and wounding 13 others. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen attacked a police patrol in Baqubah when they opened fire on the police, wounding one patrol member and killing a civilian. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Palestinian militants fired rockets at southern Israel, damaging a building in the Israeli settlement of Sederot.  No injuries were reported.  Rocket attacks increased dramatically as news spread of an explosion on a Gaza beach that killed eight Palestinians.  While Israel later declared that the explosion was not from an errant shell fired by Israeli Defense Forces (IDF), many Palestinians believe otherwise.The al Quds Brigades, the armed wing of Palestine Islamic Jihad; the Popular Resistance Committees; the al Aqsa Martyrs Brigade; and the armed wing of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine all claimed responsibility, although separately, for firing rockets on Israel on this day.
Unidentified assailants set off a bomb in front of the offices of Sui Southern Gas Company Limited in Mustung, though no injuries were reported in the explosion.
Three oil engineers were killed when gunmen attacked their car on the road between Bayji and Tikrit.  Attacks on oil industry employees and the oil industry generally are frequent in Iraq. Gunmen use these attacks to undermine the Iraqi reconstruction process and to disrupt one of Iraq's most profitable industries.
Gunmen opened fire on the funeral procession for Zuhair Mohammed Kashmula, the brother of Nineveh provincial governor Duraid Mohammad Kashmula, in Mosul. No injuries were caused. Kashmula was killed by gunmen who opened fire on him as he left evening prayers on June 8. Attacks on government officials and their families are frequent in Iraq.
Galina Gubina, deputy head of administration of the Ingush village of Ordzhonikidzevskaya, was shot by unidentified attackers as she was walking from her house to her car.  It is speculated that Gubina was murdered because of her involvement with programs for the return of ethnic Russians to the republic.
################
The Basque separatist group, Irrintzi claimed responsibility for an attack against the hotel and restaurant of French chef, Alain Ducasse in Bidarray.  The group left two explosive devices at the Ostape hotel.  There were no reported injuries.  Irrintzi stated that they wish to oppose the French government's policy of scorn.  They also claimed responsibility for three other attacks that took place between June and September.
A roadside bomb exploded in a popular market in Baghdad, killing three people and wounding 28 others. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
A dignitary in Abi al-Khasib city, Fahd Muhammad Abd-al-Rahim, was kidnapped and later found dead. Attacks on important leaders are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on a coffee shop in Khalis, wounding eight civilians. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
A National Capital Region Police Office bus that was being used as a field office was bombed while parked along Commonwealth Avenue in Philcoa, Quezon City.  The interior was damaged and the windows were shattered, but no one was injured, as the attack took place in the early morning.  This bombing is believed to have been coordinated with at least two others around the independence holiday and was claimed by a group known as Taong Bayan at Kawal.
On June 11, unidentified assailants bombed an oil pipeline in Tinsukia district, injuring three people in the explosion.
A bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, killing one person and wounding eight others. Attacks on polcie are frequent in Iraq.
An explosive charge detonated near the car of Ahmad Yasin, the brother of the head of the Samarra Municipal Council, in Samarra. Yasin was not injured, but one of his bodyguards and three civilians were injured in the attack. Attacks on local government officials are frequent in Iraq.
A security guard who worked for the Health Ministry was killed by gunmen who kidnapped, tortured, and shot him. The attack occurred in Baghdad. Attacks on government workers and security personnel are frequent in Iraq.
Upwards of twenty rockets fell on southern Israel.  No damage or injuries were reported.  The al Quds Brigades, the armed wing of Palestine Islamic Jihad, claimed responsibility for firing several rockets at Israel on this day.  The attack comes after a weekend in which over fifty rockets were fired at Israeli targets. Palestinian militants have been responding to the deaths of eight Palestinians on 9 June.  Family members were at a Gaza beach when an explosive device detonated.  While Israel declared that the explosion was not from an errant shell fired by Israeli Defense Forces (IDF), many Palestinians believe otherwise.
On June 12, unidentified assailants set off a timer device at Bazaar Chariali in the Digboi area of Tinsukia District, killing one person and injuring eleven others.
A suicide bomber detonated his car bomb by driving into a gas station in Tal Afar where cars were lined up to get gas, killing four people and wounding at least 40. Attacks on gas stations are frequent in Iraq, as insurgents seek to undermine the ability of the government to provide gas and other utilities.
Two teachers were shot in Baghdad by gunmen who opened fire on them. Attacks on teachers are frequent in Iraq.
Police found nine bodies in a river in Suwayra. The bodies all had signs of torture and had been shot in the head and the chest. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
Palestinian militants fired four missiles at Israel, however all landed in Palestinian territory.  No damage or injuries were reported.
Gunmen killed a police captain and wounded two of his bodyguards when they opened fire on the captain's car in Karbala. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A suicide car bomber attempted to detonate his explosives outside a headquarters building for the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) party in Kirkuk, but guards shot the driver before he could detonate the bomb. This incident occurred on a day when at least six car bombings occurred in the city, including some targeting other PUK headquarters.The attack, and all the suicide bombings, were claimed by the Mujahideen Shura Council, a group made up of an alliance of terrorist groups including al-Qaeda in Iraq, Victorious Army Group, the Army of al-Sunnah Wal Jamaa, Jamaa al-Murabiteen, Ansar al-Tawhid Brigades, Islamic Jihad Brigades, the Strangers Brigades, and the Horrors Brigades.
A car bomb targeting a police patrol exploded in a market in Samarra, however the bomb missed the police and instead killed four civilians and wounded seven others. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen attacked a police patrol in Kut with gunfire, killing one policeman and wounding two others. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Militants from Palestine Islamic Jihad fired a qassam rocket at a strategic infrastructure facility in Ashqelon.  No damage or injuries were reported.  Israeli media reported a noticeable decline in rocket fire on this day.  Some news dailies stated that Hamas had instructed its operatives to stop all rocket attacks, however, the group denied this.
On June 14, security officials in Miranshah discovered a headless body in the Thabi village area.  A note attached to the body explained that the man had been killed upon suspicion of being a spy for American forces.
Gunmen killed a construction contractor outside his home in Najaf when they opened fire on him. Police say the man worked for the Iraqi government and the US-led Iraqi forces in Najaf and was also the brother of a member of Najafs provincial council. Attacks on those who work with US forces are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded near a police commando patrol in Baghdad, killing one police commando and wounding another. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Nine blasts hit a tea shop near a police post in Pattani's Khko Pho District killing one and injuring fifteen others.  These explosions were part of a coordinated series of bombings all over southern Thailand.
Sixteen bomb blasts exploded in Narathiwat's Muang, Ruso, Ra Ngae, and Takbai Districts injuring five marines.  These explosions were part of a coordinated series of bombings all over southern Thailand.
A bomb exploded under a border patrol pickup truck parked outside an officer's apartment in Yala's Muang District, destroying the vehicle.  This explosion was part of a coordinated series of bombings all over southern Thailand, including at least five in Yala.
A bomb exploded at a checkpoint for Pattani's provincial seat compound, injuring four officials.  This bombing was simultaneous to at least fourteen others in this province and more than eleven others in the south.  Runda Kumpalan Kecil (RKK), along with local militant support, is suspected.
The provincial seat and head offices of Yala's Raman were bombed in a series of eight blasts that also targeted Yala's Bannangsata, Yaha, and Than To Districts.  No casualties were reported.  These attacks were likely executed in coordination with blasts throughout the south on the same day.  Some of these attacks were attributed to Runda Kumpalan Kecil (RKK).
On June 15, unidentified assailants managed to detonate a mine as a vehicle belonging to a Turkish construction company drove over it.  The vehicle was carrying Afghan workers to a job site when the explosion occurred, killing two workers and injuring another.  Although no group has claimed responsibility, the Taliban has demanded that all foreign companies leave Afghanistan and have attacked Turkish construction companies in the past.
In Jaffna District, suspected Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) gunmen shot and killed a police officer working a security detail at the Udayan Newspaper Office on Kasthuriya road.
A car bomb exploded outside a bakery in Baghdad, killing three people and wounding 14 others. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen shot Col. Ali Shakir Mahmoud in Baqubah. Mahmoud is in charge of units protecting oil installations in Baqubah. Attacks on oil facilities and the guards who protect them are frequent in Iraq. Gunmen use these attacks to undermine the reconstruction process.
Hasan Eskinutlu, a Turkish engineer in Iraq, was kidnapped along with his translator in Baghdad. The group holding Eskinutlu identified itself as Al-Imam Ali Brigades and demanded that the Turkish government pressure the Iraqi government to release prisoners held in US and Iraqi jails. It also demanded that the Turkish Government withdraw its ambassador and prevent Turkish companies from working with US forces in Iraq. The group gave the Turkish government one week to comply. Attacks on engineers, particularly foreign contractors, are frequent in Iraq. Gunmen use these attacks to undermine the Iraqi reconstruction  process.
A car bomb exploded at Manangdama intersection in Yala's Kabang District, seriously injuring two people.  This bomb was one in a series of attacks that took place throughout the day primarily aimed at railway facilities.
A bomb exploded in a trash can of Narathiwat's Sungai Kolok railway station.  There were no injuries reported.  This bomb was one in a series of attacks that took place throughout the day primarily aimed at railway facilities, including four in this province.
A bomb destroyed the power lines connecting Sibi and Harnai, interrupting the supply of electricity to several neighborhoods in the area.Note: Incident date is approximate.
This is the third report of a series of three explosions that went off in central Dushanbe over the course of several hours during the early morning of June 16. The third explosion occurred near the Constitutional Court at around 8:30 AM. The third explosion was reported to be the least powerful of the three. There is no indication if the explosion caused damage to the building, fatalities, or injuries. Security ministry officials declined to comment on possible links to terrorism until the investigation was completed.
Unknown perpetrators sent a packaged bomb that looked like a book wrapped in an envelope to Senator Armando Benedetti, who is a member of President Alvaro Uribe's U party. The package did not reach Benedetti and there were no fatalities or injuries reported.  In recent days, there were several other package bombs sent out to other lawmakers and journalists.  The perpetrators are unknown.Other Sources: Caracol Radio, 17 June
A suicide bomber with explosives hidden in his shoes detonated his explosives inside the Shiite Buratha mosque in Baghdad, killing 13 people and wounding 28. The bomber detonated his explosives after guards, who found two other pairs of explosive-filled shoes outside the mosque, entered the mosque to search it. This is the second time that the Buratha mosque has been attacked in a little over two months. The imam of the mosque, Jalal Eddin al-Sagheer, who often spoke against Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, may have been one of the targets. Al-Sagheer blamed al-Qaeda for the attack.  Attacks on religious buildings in Iraq are frequent.
Unknown perpetrators sent a packaged bomb that looked like a book wrapped in an envelope to Caracol Radio journalist Ernesto Macausland. There were no fatalities or injuries reported.  In recent days, there were several other package bombs sent out to other lawmakers and journalists.  The perpetrators are unknown.Other Sources: Caracol Radio, 17 June
Two Molotov cocktails were thrown at the Turkish Consulate General building in Paris early in the morning.  The blasts caused slight damages to the front door, but no one was hurt.  Police were able to arrest three suspects in connect with the attack.
An explosive charge detonated near a police patrol in Mahlaj, but no injuries were reported. Attack on police are frequent in Iraq.
A car bomb exploded near a police checkpoint in a Shiite district of Baghdad, killing 12 people and wounding 38 others. The attack was one of several on police in Baghdad on this day. The attack was claimed by the Mujahideen Shura Council, an alliance of terrorist groups including al-Qaeda in Iraq, Victorious Army Group, the Army of al-Sunnah Wal Jamaa, Jamaa al-Murabiteen, Ansar al-Tawhid Brigades, Islamic Jihad Brigades, the Strangers Brigades, and the Horrors Brigades.
Gunmen opened fire on a police patrol in Mosul, killing a policeman and wounding two others. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
The al-Nasir Salah-al-Din Brigades, the armed wing of the Popular Resistance Committees, claimed responsibility for firing rockets at several targets in southern Israel, including Kerem Shalom and Atzmona.  The group stated that the attack came in response to Israel's targeted killing of Jamal Abu Samhadana, the Hamas government's top security chief.  No damage or injuries were reported.
A roadside bomb in Narathiwat's Joh I Rong District was detonated while a convoy of police vehicles was passing, injuring four policemen and two others.
On June 18 in Doda, unidentified assailants threw a grenade at the Central Reserve Police Force bunker located at the Kishtwar Bus Stand.  Five people were injured in the explosion.
Gunmen in Fallujah opened fire on a police vehicle, wounding a woman who was being transported by police to the hospital. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen killed three Iranians who worked for the Advisory clinic in Baqubah when they opened fire on them as the men drove near the Adivisory Clinic.  Attacks on foreigners who work in Iraq are frequent in Iraq. The attack may also have had sectarian motivations.The attack was claimed by the Mujahideen Council, an alliance of terrorist organizations including al-Qaeda in Iraq, Victorious Army Group, the Army of al-Sunnah Wal Jamaa, Jamaa al-Murabiteen, Ansar al-Tawhid Brigades, Islamic Jihad Brigades, the Strangers Brigades, and the Horrors Brigades.
An Iraqi translator who worked with the British Army in Basra was killed by gunmen who opened fire on him and his wife after storming their house. Both the  translator and his wife were killed. Attacks on those who support coalition forces are frequent in Iraq.
A group of unidentified perpetrators opened fire at living quarters of civil servants in the city of Sirnak.  Witnesses reported seeing four gunmen, who fired on the police checkpoint and living quarters of the premises.  No further information is available.
On June 19, suspected Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) gunmen attacked a Somawathi Buddhist temple located in Pollonaruwa District.  Security officials were able to repel the attack before any casualties occurred.
Gunmen killed Col. Abdel Shahid Saleh, when they opened fire on him in Karbala. Two bodyguards were also wounded in the attack. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on a group of police in Amarah, killing six police and wounding one. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A grenade exploded on the territory of the Territorial Police Department in the village of Sary-Su in the Shelkovskiy region at the same time as the Regional Interior Department was fired on in the nearby village of Shelkovskaya.  No one was injured or killed in the attack and the police did not return fire.
In Torkham, a bomb exploded in a truck traveling in a convoy of vehicles bringing supplies into Afghanistan.  The explosion destroyed the truck it was placed in as well as eight other vehicles that were traveling nearby.  Casualty figures were not reported.Note: Incident date is approximate.
A car bomb exploded in the Sadr city area of Baghdad in a crowded market, killing seven people and wounding 18 others. This was one of three attacks on markets on this day in Baghdad. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen opened fire on the car of Hassan Mahol, the head of the local council in Baghdad's Dora district, wounding him. Attacks on local government officials are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, wounding one policeman. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed Hudhairi Abbas, the deputy police chief of Fallujah, when they opened fire on him in the city. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
In Farah Province, unidentified assailants have set fire to a school in the Golestan District.  Two of the school's tents caught on fire, though no injuries were reported.
Two policemen were found dead in Mosul. Their bodies showed signs of torture and gunshot wounds. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A policeman was killed when insurgents opened fire on his patrol in Mosul. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Palestine Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility for firing two rockets at the Israeli settlement of Sederot.  No damage or injuries were reported.
A group of unidentified individuals attacked a post office on Tejeria Street in San Sebastian with a homemade firebomb.  The device, which was made of a bottle of petrol, caused a fire which had to be extinguished by fire services.  The attack damaged the front wall of the post office, but there were no reported casualties.
A car bomb exploded near a movie theater in Baghdad, killing two people and wounding five others.
Gunmen in Najaf shot and killed a policeman. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
The Vice President of the Free Democratic Homeland Party, Hamid Abd Awn, was killed by gunmen who opened fire on him. Attacks on political officials are frequent in Iraq.
According to the Associated Press, three rockets landed in Israel. The al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade and the National Resistance Committees, the armed wing of the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine, claimed joint-responsibility for firing two rockets on the Israeli settlement of Sederot.  The al Quds Brigades, the armed wing of Palestine Islamic Jihad, also claimed responsibility for firing two rockets at Sederot on this day.  No damage or injuries were reported. The al Quds Brigades also claimed responsibility for firing two rockets on the Kerem Shalom crossing on this day.
On June 23, unidentified assailants threw a grenade at a group of Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel near a bus stand in Doda.  Three CRPF and four civilians were injured in the explosion.
Gunmen ambushed a police patrol in Latifiyah, killing two policemen. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
An explosive charge detonated in a market in northern Baghdad, causing a fire, but no injuries. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
A bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, killing one police officer and wounding four others. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
The al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade claimed responsibility for firing two rockets at the Israeli city of Ashqelon.  No damage or injuries were reported.  As an industrial city, Ashqelon is often the target of rocket attacks.While the al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade is linked with Fatah, the relationship is not always clear.
Unidentified assailants threw a grenade at a group of Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel located near the Budshah Chowk area of Srinagar. The grenade missed its target and killed one civilian and injured ten others.   Note: Incident date is approximate
A roadside bomb detonated near the convoy of Mousa Hachim, the intelligence chief in Kirkuk, killing him and two of his bodyguards. Attacks on police officials are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb detonated near a police patrol, wounding four police officers and four civilians. The attack occurred in Baghdad. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Palestinian militants fired rockets at the Israeli town of Kfar Azza.  In a joint statement, the al Mujahideen Brigades, a group linked to Fatah, and the Abu Ali Mustafa Brigades, a group affiliated with the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, claimed responsibility for the attack.  The al-Aqsa Martyrs brigade also claimed firing rockets on Kfar Azza on this day.  No damage or injuries were reported.  Note: While the al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade is linked to Fatah, the relationship between the two is not always clear.
On June 25, suspected members of the Communist Party of India-Maoists blew up a section of railroad tracks in an unidentified location in Hazaribagh District.  This was the second of two sections of railroad tracks that the Maoists blew up that day.
A bomb exploded in a crowded Baghdad market, killing three people and wounding seven others. The attack occurred in the Shorga market at midday. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
A bomb exploded inside a minibus in Baghdad, killing two people and wounding five others. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
A car bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, killing one policeman and wounding three others. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Armed men opened fire on Habes Naji Ali, a member of the Riyadh local council, in Riyadh. Ali was not injured in the attack. Attacks on local government members are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on a policeman and killed him in Kut.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb containing the equivalent of 300 grams of TNT exploded next to a mobile telephone antenna in the Dachnoye village in the Prigorodnyy region of North Ossetia.  The bomb contained nuts and bolts to maximize impact.   No one was injured and the antenna received only minor damage; this was the first out of three explosions in North Ossetia that day.
Militants from Palestine Islamic Jihad fired two rockets at the Kerem Shalom crossing.  No damage or injuries were reported.
Gunmen attacked the convoy of Adnan al-Dulaimi, the head of the Sunni Iraqi Accordance Front in Baghdad, killing one of his bodyguards. Al-Dulaimi was not in the convoy at the time of the attack. Attacks on senior politicians are frequent in Iraq.
A policeman was shot in Fallujah. Attacks on policemen are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on two police officers at the Joint Coordination Center in Baqubah, killing them. Attacks on policemen are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on the car of a local general inspector for the Ministry of Interior in Najaf, wounding him and his bodyguard and killing his driver. Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.
A passenger of a bus driving from Grozny to Shali attempted to detonate a grenade, but was prevented from doing so by another passenger who threw the grenade out the window.  The perpetrator was immediately arrested upon getting off the bus.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) set up an ambush and shot and killed two policemen and wounded two others.
Unidentified assailants bombed two gas pipelines in the Pir Koh area of Dera Bugti.  Following the explosions, the supply of gas to the Pir Koh gas plant was interrupted, though no casualties were reported.Note: Incident date is approximate.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, killing three police and wounding three others. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen set fire to the Al-Hamzah mosque in Kharnabat, damaging the mosque. Three nearby houses were also set on fire. Three people were killed and two wounded during the attack. Religious buildings in Iraq are the frequent target of attack. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen attacked the convoy of a tribal leader in Dujail, killing him and four of his drivers.  Attacks on tribal leaders are frequent in Iraq and are motivated by sectarian tensions or the cooperation of tribal leaders with US forces and the Iraqi government.
The al Aqsa Martyrs Brigade claimed responsibility for firing two rockets on the Israeli settlement of Sederot.  No damage or injuries were reported.
On June 28, suspected members of the Janajuddha faction of the Purbo Banglar Communist Party (PBCP) shot and killed two Bangladesh National Party activists and injured another in two separate incidents in Kushtia District.
A bomb exploded in a market in the Shiite district of Kadhimiya, Baghdad, killing one person and wounding eight others. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
An explosive charge detonated near a police patrol in Baghdad, killing one policeman and wounding two others. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen detonated explosives inside the future headquarters of the Al-Dulu'iyah sub-Districts offices. The office was damaged, but no injuries were reported. Attacks on government offices are frequent in Iraq.
A Shiite garbage collector was killed by gunmen in Baghdad who opened fire on him. The attack may have had sectarian motivations. Attacks on trash collectors are frequent in Iraq as trash collectors often discover and alert police about roadside bombs.
Gunmen near Bayji stopped a bus carrying 60 employees of the Bayji oil refinery, set their bus on fire, and kidnapped the employees.  The attack occurred in the Jebal al Hamreen area. Later in the day, all 60 employees were found. The kidnappers had left them in an isolated area and kept only the bus driver. Attacks on government employees and those who work for oil refineries and utilities are frequent in Iraq. These attacks attempt to undermine the reconstruction process and sometimes have sectarian motivations.
Five members of the same family were killed in Karbala. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
A police company office was attacked with explosives in Baqubah. No casualties were reported.
A criminal intelligence policeman was shot in Karbala. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A rocket landed near the Israeli settlement of Sederot.  In a joint statement, the al-Nasir Salah-al-Din Brigades, the military wing of the Popular Resistance Committees, and the al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade claimed responsibility for firing three rockets on Sederot on this day.  No damage or injuries were reported.Note: While the al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade is often linked to Fatah, the relationship between the two is not always clear.
Shiite gunmen opened fire on a convoy of Sunnis who were moving out of the village of Daliqiya after being threatened by Shiite residents. The gunmen said the attack was in retaliation for a suicide attack in Baqubah earlier in the week. Iraqi police tried to intervene in the incident. However, snipers killed the head of the police force, Col. Sami Abbas Hassan, and two of his bodyguards. US and Iraqi forces then intervened, leading to a gun battle in which four suspects were detained, three wounded, and three killed.
A colonel in Iraq's security forces was killed and his wife wounded  when gunmen opened fire on his car in Mosul. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded near a police patrol in Multaqi, killing one policeman and wounding nine others. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
The armed wing of the Popular Resistance Committees claimed responsibility for firing three rockets at Israeli settlements in the western Negev.  No damage or injuries were reported.
A policeman was killed in a drive-by shooting in Kirkuk. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A car bomb exploded in a popular outdoor market in Baghdad's Dora neighborhood, killing 66 people and wounding 114. The attack may have had sectarian motivations. The blast also damaged at least 22 stores and 14 cars. The attack was claimed by the Sunna Supporters Group in an Internet statement. In the statement, the group said the attack was retaliation for Shiite attacks on Sunnis.On July 4, officials announced that they had killed an insurgent with ties to Al-Qaeda believed to have been behind the bomb attack during a raid in Anbar province.
A suicide car bomber targeting a police patrol in Mosul detonated his explosives, killing two policemen and wounding six people. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A police officer, Kudisi Demli, died while trying to defuse an explosive device in the town of Kocakoy.  No information on the target of the bomb was available.
Gunmen attacked a mosque in Baqubah. Two people were killed and seven wounded in the attack. Attacks on religious institutions are frequent in Iraq and usually have sectarian motivations.
Gunmen attempted to kidnapped Lida Yassin, a Shiite lawmaker, in Baghdad. Yassin was not kidnapped in the incident, but eight of her bodyguards were. Attacks on government personnel are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded outside a popular restaurant in Baghdad, killing two people and wounding 13 others. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
A bomb exploded in a popular market in Mahmoudiya, killing four people and wounding 22 others. Attacks on markets are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Gunmen opened fire on Ahmad Abd-al-Ghafur, the police chief in the Karada district of Baghdad. Abd-al-Ghafur was not killed or injured in the attack. No injuries were reported. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded at a five year-old mosque in the town of Yakhroma in the Dmitrovskiy region on the night from 3rd into 4th July.  There were no injuries but the building sustained serious damage, as did nearby houses.
On July 3, members of the Jewel Garlossa faction of Dima Halim Daogah (DHD) threw a grenade into a marketplace in North Cachar Hills District, injuring eighteen people.  Following the attack, a spokesman for the DHD claimed responsibility for the attack, explaining that they wanted to teach a lesson to the shop owner.
A bomb exploded in a market in Mahmoudiya, killing three people and wounding 22. The bombing may have had sectarian motivations. This is the second attack on the same market in two days.
Five bodies, all with signs of torture and with gunshot wounds, were found in Fallujah. The attack may have had sectarian motivations
Gunmen in Basra stormed the home of a Sunni family and killed the father and son in the home. The gunmen also kidnapped six other people. The attack may have had sectarian motivations. On July 5, officials announced that they had found four of the kidnapped victims, all dead.
A fragmentation bomb detonated in front of the headquarters of the Justice and Development Party (AKP) in Kartal.  The bomb was left in a trash can in front of the building and caused some damages but no injuries.  No group has claimed responsibility for the attack.
A group of five Afghan construction workers were traveling home from working on a  US Military Base project in eastern Afghanistan when they came under attack by suspected Taliban gunmen.  All five laborers were shot and killed in the attack.Note: Incident date and location is approximate.
On July 4, a large group of suspected members of the Communist Party of India-Maoists attacked the Tankuppa police station  in Gaya District.  After three hours of fighting, the Maoists used dynamite to blow up the building, killing two police officers and injuring two others.
Three policemen were killed and three others wounded when a roadside bomb exploded near their patrol in Baghdad. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen killed two members of the banned Baath Party in Karbala. Attacks on those who were members of the Baath Party and were loyal to Saddam Hussein are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on a police officer in Fallujah, seriously wounding him. The officer died the following day. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
One car was destroyed and two significantly damaged in an arson attack in Dubrovnik.  One of the cars damaged  belonged to the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) mission in Albania and the other was a private car with a Zagreb license plate.  The third car, which was completely destroyed, was a business car owned by the Serbian Ministry of Finance and Customs.  The cars sustained the fire at the Neptun hotel parking lot which was hosting an OSCE workshop on international cooperation in Southeast Europe.  The next day the city was to host a conference of the Southeastern European states' female ministers to be attended by the Serbian Deputy Prime Minister.
A roadside bomb killed one soldier and injured nine others as they were escorting teachers home in Yala.
A bomb exploded near a popular restaurant in Tayaran Square in Baghdad, killing two people and wounding 10 others. The restaurant had banners praising Shiite martyrs. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
A roadside bomb exploded in Kirkuk near a car carrying members of a private security company. Two people were killed and three wounded in the attack. The nationality of the injured was not released. Attacks on private security contractors are frequent in Iraq. The attack was followed by a coordinated attack on firefighters who arrived to help at the site of the first blast. The second bomb wounded two people. Insurgents frequently use this tactic of targeting first responders.
A bomb exploded near a group of firefighters and first responders in Kirkuk who were trying to help at the scene of an attack on a private security contractor car. Two firefighters were injured in the explosion. Insurgents frequently use the tactic of targeting first responders with follow-on blasts.
A car bomb exploded near a civil defense official in Kirkuk, but the blast missed its target and instead wounded three civilians. The officials was identified as Major General Al-Nasih Fulayih Shawani. Attacks on police and first responders are frequent in Iraq.
Three employees of the Red Crescent Society were kidnapped in Baghdad, but later freed by Iraqi forces at a checkpoint in the city. Attacks on NGO employees and humanitarian workers in Iraq are frequent.
A passenger on a minibus in Tiraspol, the capitol of Moldova's breakaway Dniester region, set off a bomb, killing seven of the eleven passengers and seriously injuring the other four, as well as six passengers on a nearby trolleybus.  The suspect himself was killed in the explosion, which ripped the roof off of the minivan and threw it a distance of approximately 100 meters.  Two Russian peacekeeping troops were injured in the explosion, Aleksandr Zakusilo, captain of the Russian army operational group for the region, and Sergeant Igor Polezhayev.  The bomb is said to have contained pieces of wire to increase damage and was set off by an electromagnetic fuse.
On July 6, suspected members of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam threw a grenade targeting a group of police officers in the Chunnahunnakam area of Jaffna.  The police were providing security for the Eelam People's Democratic Party office when they were attacked.  Four officers were wounded in the attack.
Gunmen shot and killed a police major who works in the Interior Ministry in Baqubah. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
An explosive device detonated in central Kirkuk, wounding two civilians. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen opened shot and killed Salah Hasan Yas, a retired Iraqi judge, while he was driving in Baghdad. Hasan's son was also wounded in the attack. Attacks on judges, who are viewed as part of the new Iraqi government, are frequent.
The al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade claimed responsibility for firing six rockets at targets in Israel.  No damage or injuries were reported.  Palestinian militants fired at least fifteen rockets on Sederot on this day.Note: while the al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade is often linked to Fatah, the relationship between the two groups is not always clear.
In Kohlu, unidentified assailants bombed a gas pipeline.  No injuries were reported in the incident.Note: Incident date is approximate.
Gunmen kidnapped and killed Sunni Sheikh Said Mohammed Taha al-Samarrai, the imam of a mosque in Mahmoudiya. Attacks on mosque imams are frequent in Iraq and usually have sectarian motivations.
A bomb exploded outside the al-Furqan Sunni mosque in Baghdad, wounding one person. The attack was one of several on mosques in Iraq on this day. The majority of attacks were on Sunni mosques. Mosques are frequently targeted in sectarian attacks in Iraq.
A train station near Nazran along the North Caucasus Railway was bombed with an explosive device equivalent to 1.5kg of TNT.  No one was injured, but a large crater was created and some train cars and a stretch of railway received some damage.
The al-Quds Brigades, the armed wing of Palestine Islamic Jihad, claimed responsibility for firing a rocket on the Israeli city of Ashqelon.  No damage or injuries were reported.  As an industrial city in southern Israel, Ashqelon is the frequent target of rocket attacks.The group also claimed firing rockets on Rafah international airport on this day.
On July 8, the head of a Haiwand NGO and former candidate for the Mashrano Jerga (upper house), identified as Mohammad Faruq, was attacked  by unidentified gunmen as he was traveling to meet his family just outside of Peshawar.  Despite taking four bullets in the chest and one in the leg, Faruq was able to survive the attack.
An Iraqi female translator working with US forces was shot and killed by gunmen in Baghdad. Attacks on those who work with US forces are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on a Sunni mosque in Baghdad. Mosque guards returned fire and the attackers fled without causing any casualties. Attacks on religious buildings are frequent in Iraq and usually have sectarian motivations.
The al-Nasir Salah-al-Din Brigades, the armed wing of the Popular Resistance Committees, claimed responsibility for a rocket attack on the Israeli settlement of Sederot.  One rocket landed on a home, moderately injuring a 42-year-old man.
On July 9, suspected Taliban gunmen attacked a police patrol along the Kandahar-Kabul Highway in Wardag Province.  Two policemen were injured in the attack, along with nine Taliban.
Gunmen opened fire on a police patrol in Baghdad, killing one policeman. Attacks on police and security officers are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on a police patrol in Ramadi, killing three policemen. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Two car bombs exploded simultaneously in Baghdad near a Shiite mosque, killing 17 people and wounding 38. The attack appeared to be a reprisal attack for a raid on a Sunni area in Baghdad that left 42 people dead. Attacks on religious institutions in Iraq are frequent and usually have sectarian motivations.
Shiite gunmen blocked traffic in the Sunni area of Ghazaliyah in Baghdad and opened fire at a Sunni mosque. No casualties were reported. Attacks on religious buildings in Iraq are frequent and usually have sectarian motivations.
Several government officials working for the central authority for manufacturing papers in Basra were kidnapped. Attacks on government personnel are frequent in Iraq.
Two police officers, Mehmet Yardimci and Sait Bal, were killed by unidentified gunmen in Idil, Sirnak province.  The attack took place as the officers were walking along Alanya Street on their morning patrol.
A suicide truck bomber detonated his vehicle near the office of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan Party in Kirkuk, killing five people and wounding 12 others. Attacks on political party offices are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded at a gas station in Mahmoudiya, wounding 10 people. Attacks on gas stations are frequent in Iraq, as insurgents try to disrupt the supply of services to the Iraqi people. These attacks are intended to undermine the new Iraqi government.
Gunmen opened fire on a car carrying policemen in Baghdad, killing three policemen and wounding a fourth. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, wounding five police. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded near a police commando patrol in Hillah, killing one policeman and wounding four other people. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded under a fuel tanker in Baghdad's suburb of Nahrawan. Two people were killed and 18 wounded in the blast, which occurred between a market and a medical center in the city. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
A car bomb exploded in Sharqat, near a bus and taxi depot, killing two people and wounding six others. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen attacked a group of Iraqi policemen who were part of an oil protection force, killing ten of them. The incident occurred near Sharqat. Attacks on oil protection forces are frequent in Iraq. Insurgents use these attacks to undermine one of Iraq's most improtant industries and to disrupt the reconstruction process.
Gunmen opened fire on Ghadban Zaydan, the mayor of Um al-Nuwa district of Baqubah, killing him. Attacks on local government officials are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded inside a Shiite mosque in the Tahrir district of Baghdad, destroying the mosque. No injuries were reported. Attacks on religious buildings are frequent in Iraq and usually have sectarian motivations.
On July 11, unidentified assailants set fire to the Qushtipa School for Boys and Girls in Chardara District.  The fire damaged several classrooms, offices, supplies, and equipment, though no casualties were reported.  The incident came just one day after local education officials condemned arson attacks against schools in the area.
On July 11, a series of seven explosions targeted railroad networks in Mumbai.  In all, 190 people were killed and 625 were injured across all the incidents.  One of the explosions took place in the first class trains of the Western Railway at Santacruz Station.
On July 11, suspected members of Lashkar- e-Taiba (LeT) set off on a series of attacks designed to target Indian tourists in Srinagar.  Following the attacks, locals were able to detain one assailant, who revealed to police that he was one of seven LeT cadres designated to throw grenades at Indian Tourists.  The first was a grenade attack against a tourist vehicle in the Central Market area, which injured 7 people.
Four private security guards were injured in a remote-detonated explosive attack along a highway in Silopi, Sirnak province.  The blast took place as the guards were driving down the road.  No further information is available.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives inside a restaurant in the New Baghdad area of Baghdad, killing eight people and wounding 30 others. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen opened fire on and killed two civilians working for an oil company in Kirkuk. Attacks on oil company employees and on the oil industry itself are frequent in Iraq. Gunmen use these attacks to disrupt one of Iraq's most profitable industries and to undermine the new Iraqi regime.
Armed gunmen attacked the mostly Shiite area Um al-Maalif, in Baghdad. Police, residents, and gunmen were involved in the gun battle that followed. Two people were killed, including a policeman and a civilian, and two police wounded in the attack which may have had sectarian motivations.
On July 12, a bag of explosives carried by a donkey cart exploded prematurely in the Wesh area near the Pakistani boarder.  The explosion killed one person, believed to be the bomber, and injured ten others.  Officials report that a Pakistani man had rented a donkey cart and driver to take him to an unknown destination, but his bag of explosives exploded accidentally along the way.
In Jaffna, suspected members of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) shot and killed a leader of the People's Liberation Organization of Tamil Eelam (PLOTE) outside Wembadi Girls' School.Note: Incident date is approximate.
Palestinian militants fired a qassam rocket on the Israeli city of Sederot.  No casualties were reported.
A postal policeman was killed when gunmen opened fire on him in Baghdad. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Five street cleaners were killed and two wounded when a bomb exploded near them in Baghdad. Street cleaners are frequently targeted with bomb attacks, sometimes because they are Shiite and sometimes because they inform Iraqi security forces when they find bombs hidden under garbage in the streets.  Note: it is unclear if the street cleaners were the target of the attack.
A bomb exploded in Basra near the home of Brigadier General Muhsin Musbih, a retired officer who served in the Iraqi Army under Saddam Hussin. Only material damages were caused. Attacks on those who served under Saddam Hussein are frequent in Iraq.
The head of administration of the village of Sernovodsk in the Sunzhenskiy district of Chechnya was shot and wounded by unknown persons as he was leaving his house, and wounded in the leg.  One of the attackers was arrrested two days later.
An explosive device detonated at a building that houses the Justice and Development Party (AKP) in Balcova, in Izmir province.  There were no reported casualties.
Gunmen ambushed a minivan coming from Karbala, killing the driver and wounding four passengers. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen attacked a group of police in Mosul. The resulting clash killed one civilian. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
An Iraqi contractor working with US forces was killed by gunmen in Tikrit who ambushed his car. The contractors son was wounded in the attack. Attacks on those who cooperate with US forces are frequent in Iraq.
A sniper attacked a police checkpoint in Tal Afar with gunfire, killing two policemen. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded near a the Technical Institute in Baghdad, killing one person and wounding four others. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
A mobile phone detonated bomb exploded in front of the Thairath Wittaya School in Narathiwat's Sungai Padi District, injuring two female students and a soldier.
A qassam rocket landed in a kibbutz in the Sha'ar Hanegev municipality.  The armed wing of Hamas claimed firing a rocket at a kibbutz in the same area on this day.  No casualties were reported.
A bomb exploded in a box near a market in Baghdad, killing six people and wounding eleven others. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen fired rocket-propelled grenades (RPGs) and machine guns in Baghdads Fadhil neighborhood, a largely Sunni neighborhood. Two people were killed and seven wounded in the resulting attack. The attack appeared to have sectarian motivations.
A car bomb exploded near a police patrol in Kirkuk, killing four people, including three police, and wounding 19 others. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
The muezzin of the Abu Saida mosque was kidnapped by unknown gunmen. His body was found four days later. Attacks on religious figures are frequent in Iraq and usually have sectarian motivations.
In Ganderbal, a grenade thrown by unidentified assailants exploded in the Beehama Chowk Market Place, killing one person and injuring six others.  Officials believe that the grenade may have been aimed at a member of the Central Reserve Police Force in the area but missed its target.  Following the incident dozens of citizens took to the streets to protest the attack.Note: Incident date is approximate.
The Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade and the Al-Quds Brigades, the armed wing of Palestine Islamic Jihad (PIJ), claimed responsibility for killing an Israeli settler near the Zabid settlement.  The groups stated that the attack was carried out in retaliation for Israel's attack against Lebanon.
A bomb hidden in a trash bag exploded in a commercial area in Baghdad, killing four people and wounding 21 others. The blast occurred near a gathering of day laborers looking for work in the city. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen ambushed a truck convoy, killing two truck drivers and kidnapped a third. The attack occurred between Kirkuk and Tikrit. Attacks on truck drivers, who are often supplying Iraqi or US forces or helping in reconstruction process, are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire in a market in Muqdadiyah, killing three people and wounding two others. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen in Baghdad kidnapped Adel Kazzaz, the director of the North Oil company. Kazzazs bodyguard was wounded in the attack. Attacks on oil industry officials are frequent in Iraq. Gunmen use these attacks to disrupt one of Iraqs most important industries and to undermine the new Iraqi regime.
Three Sunni Arab men, members of the Ghereir tribe, were kidnapped near Musayyib and killed. Their bodies were found mutilated and burned. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
On July 16, unidentified gunmen attacked a group of tribal elders in Ab Band District as they were traveling to Ghazni to resolve a local conflict.  One tribal elder died in the attack and one other civilian sustained injuries.
A group of unidentified gunmen opened fire at a police check point in the city of Ozalp, in Van province.  One police officer was killed in the attack.  No further information is provided.
At least six rockets were fired on the settlement of Sederot.  The armed wing of Palestine Islamic Jihad (PIJ) claimed responsibility for firing at least two of them.  No casualties were reported.
Gunmen attacked the Tahrir Police Station in Baqubah, killing one police officer and wounding two others. Two of the attackers were killed in the incident. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
On July 17, several hundred members of the Communist Party of India-Maoists attacked a Central Reserve Police Force post and government-run relief camp located in the Errabore area of Dantewara District.  Approximately 4000 local villagers were staying in the relief camp when the Maoists attacked, killing seventeen villagers, injuring seventy others, and kidnapping twenty more.
At least one rocket fell in an open field in the western Negev.  The armed wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for several attacks in the area.  No casualties were reported.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol in Hawija, killing nine people, including six policemen, and wounding three others. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on and killed three Iraqi translators working for US forces in Haditha. Attacks on those who work with US forces are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen attacked a police checkpoint in Baqubah, killing four policemen and wounding another. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
In Kandahar, unidentified gunmen attacked two vehicles carrying foreign NGO workers from Shah Wali Kot District to Tarin Kot.  Two NGO workers were killed in the attack, and another was wounded.  The victims' country of origin was not reported.Note: Incident date is approximate.
A Katyusha rocket fell on Kibbutz Bror Hayil, however no casualties were reported.  While no group claimed targeting this particular settlement, groups did claim attacks in this area.
The Earth Liberation Front (ELF) claimed responsibility for an arson attack in Guelph that caused about $80,000 in damages to a new townhouse on Arkell Road.  This is one in a series of arson attacks claimed in Guelph in recent months.NOTE:  Incident date is approximate.
A car bomb exploded near a police patrol near the Technology University in Baghdad, wounding three police. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.Police and emergency crews responding to the first blast were targeted with a follow-on attack, when two bombs exploded near the scene of the initial attack as the crews arrived.  Insurgents frequently use this tactic of targeting first responders.
Gunmen stormed a market in the town of Rasheed and opened fire, killing three people and wounding 11 others, including two policemen. Police killed two of the attackers in the incident. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen ambushed a police patrol in Mosul, wounding. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen attacked a funeral procession of a Shiite who was killed in an attack on a market in Mahmoudiya that kiilled about 50 people on July 17. Two people were killed and two wounded in the attack which also occurred in Mahmoudiya. The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
A bomb exploded near a police patrol in Baghdad, killing three police and one civilian and wounding five other people. Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
On July 19, Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) gunmen attacked the bus depot near Soura Sabzi Mandi in Srinagar.  Following the incident, a spokesperson for JeM claimed responsibility for the attack.Two police were killed and one was injured across three attacks on the day.
Palestinian militants fired at least two rockets on Nahal Oz, one of which damaged a building.  While no group claimed responsibility for firing a rocket on Nahal Oz, groups did claim other attacks in this area.
Militants killed three engineers working at the Baiju oil refinery, approximately 112 miles north of Baghdad.  Attacks on oil installations and on those who staff them are frequent in Iraq, as insurgents attempt to destabilize one of the country's most profitable industries.
An ambulance carrying wounded police officers to the hospital was the target of a bombing in the Al-Miqdadiyah area of northeast Ba'qubah.  No one was injured, but the ambulance was damaged.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Police discovered a car bomb that was about to detonate near the Al-Shurjah marked in the mostly Shiite Shula district of Baghdad.   The device was defused without incident.  Shortly before three people were killed and another ten wounded when a car bomb exploded in the same area.  The attacks may have had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen killed five members of a family in Mosul.  The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
The Al-Quds Brigades, the armed wing of Palestine Islamic Jihad (PIJ), claimed responsibility for firing a rocket on the Israeli settlement of Sederot.  No casualties were reported.
Gunmen attacked the Shiite neighborhood of Mahmoudiya, killing seven security personnel.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.  On 17 July gunmen attacked a Shiite market in the area, killing 51 people.
The Building of the Ministry of Labor and Social Development in Chechnya was set on fire, destroying the second floor and the roof, although it was possible to save part of the first floor; there were no injuries or deaths.  The building was located in the Leninskiy area of Grozny, near the governmental building complex.
A bomb exploded near a police patrol in Samarra.  No casualties were reported.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Insurgents opened fire on police in a market in Baqubah.  When additional police officers arrived to provide support, they were targeted by two roadside bombs.  The attacks killed a total of three police officers and wounded ten other people, including five police.  Insurgents frequently target security or medical personnel who are responding to an earlier attack.A bomb also exploded outside a policeman's home in Baqubah on this day.  It is unclear if the attacks were related.
On July 22, unidentified assailants set off a small explosion at a traffic circle outside the US Embassy in Kabul.  The explosion occurred approximately one hundred yards from the security barriers outside the Embassy, though no injuries or damage was reported.  Later, an International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) found a second bomb hidden along the road to Kabul airport.
On July 22, members of the Purbo Banglar Communist Party's (PBCP's) Janajuddha faction attacked and killed two people in the Ataikula area of Pabna District, including one local Awami League leader.  Following the attack, members of PBCP claimed responsibility for the attack.
Palestinian militants fired a rocket on the Israeli settlement of Nahal Oz.  No casualties were reported.  While no group claimed responsibility for an attack on Nahal Oz, groups did claim firing rockets in the area.
Armed insurgents kidnapped a contractor from the Al-Siniyah area, north of Tikrit.  Contractors are frequently targeted in Iraq for cooperating with American forces.
A suicide bomber blew up a minibus near a police station in the Al-Jamilah market in the Shiite district of Sadr City, Baghdad.  The attack killed upwards of 34 people, including the bomber, and injured 72 others.  That same morning US and Iraqi forces raided homes in the area and arrested seven people.  The attack may have had sectarian motivations.Two hours after the attack a second bomb detonated, killing eight people and wounding twenty others.
On July 23, a man was apparently taking a taxi on his way to a suicide bombing in the Gholam Khan area of Khost Province when the explosives that he had attached to his body exploded prematurely.  The explosion killed the man with the explosives as well as one other passenger in the taxi.  Three other passengers that were in the taxi at the time were also injured.
Unknown perpetrators bombed the headquarters of the Fifth Republic Movement (MVR).  There were no fatalities or injuries.  National Assembly members claim that the attack was intended to destabilize the country before the presidential elections in December.
The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for firing two rockets on the Israeli settlement of Sederot.  No casualties were reported.
Insurgents shot and killed Sheikh Mahmoud al-Neda, the head of the Baijat tribe, when they attacked an office where he was in a meeting.  The attack also killed a lawyer and wounded Sheikh Mizahim al-Mustafa.  Some sources stated that two others were also killed.  The Baijat tribe includes several clans, most notably that of Saddam Hussein.
A car bomb exploded near a police patrol in Samarra, killing two civilians and wounding seventeen others, including seven police.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives at a Samarra Emergency Battalion checkpoint north of Baghdad.  The blast killed the bomber and a civilian; six police officers were wounded.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
On July 24, a former Member of the Punjab Assembly, identified as Gulfam Ashraf, was shot and killed by unidentified gunmen outside Ravi Rayon Mills in Kala Shah Kaku.  Two people traveling with Ashraf were injured in the shooting.
A Buddhist Thai language teacher was shot to death in front of his classroom by four individuals dressed as students.  The incident occurred in Narathiwat's Ban Bue Rang School. After the attack all schools in the district were temporarily closed.
Insurgents shot and killed a police officer in Ishaqi, about 100 kilometers north of Baghdad, as he walked to work.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen ambushed a Shiite family as they were fleeing a Sunni neighborhood of Baghdad, killing two people and wounding one other.  The family had received threats by a sectarian death squad before the attack.
Insurgents shot and wounded four employees of a private Iraqi company that works with the US military.  Attacks on those who collaborate with US forces are frequent in Iraq.
In Ghazni, members of the Taliban set fire to two fuel tankers that were supplying fuel to a Turkish road construction company in the Band-e Sarda area.  No injuries or casualties were reported in the incident.  Police arrived in time to save a third tanker that was traveling through the area.  Following the incident, a spokesman for the Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack.Note: Incident date is approximate.
Haji Abidov, the imam of Shamkhal Magdi (a residential center near Makhachkala) was shot and wounded in Makhachkala.  Abidov's attacker was later identified as Magomed Magomedov, who was killed by authorities on August 26.
The Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade claimed responsibility for firing a rocket on the Israeli settlement of Nahal Oz.  No casualties were reported.Note, while the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade is often linked with Fatah, the relationship is not always clear.
Insurgents attacked a police patrol in Baqubah with gunfire, killing a policeman and one civilian, and wounding one policeman.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Insurgents in police uniforms kidnapped seventeen people--ten men, five women, and two children--from an apartment building in Baghdad.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) launched an artillery shell, made from a cooking gas cylinder filled with explosives, at an oil industry facility belonging to Ecopetrol.  Two workers and two soldiers were killed. The workers were repairmen who were trying to reach a damaged portion of the Cano Limon-Covenas line that had been attacked earlier by the FARC.  Other sources: Radio Cadena Nacional, 27 July
On July 26, the principal of the Mastung Cadet College, identified as Mian Maqbool Ahmed Rehbar, was shot and killed by unidentified gunmen in his home.Note: Location is approximate.
Insurgents fired on the Al-Rahman Mosque in the Al-Mansur area (exact city unclear).  No damage or injuries were reported.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
A bomb exploded along the road between Balandruz and Baqubah near an ambulance carrying two patients to the hospital, killing four people and wounding four others.  Attacks on ambulances, especially those treating people wounded in insurgent attacks, are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol, killing two policemen and wounding two others.  The explosion occurred near Tikrit.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen kidnapped Yildirim Tek, a Turkish employee of the Ankara-based Vinsan Construction Company.  Two weeks after the kidnapping, a previously unknown group calling itself the Lions of Truth Brigades (Saraya Luyuth al-Haq) sent a video of Tek to an Arab television station.  The perpetrators demanded that the Turkish government force Vinsan Construction to leave Iraq.  In September, the group stated that if its demands were not me, Tek would be killed.On 13 November, the body of Tek was found near the Baghdad airport.  It is unclear how and when Tek was murdered.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia launched grenades at a police station.  During the attack, they also hit a church and some houses.  One policeman was reported to be injured.
Shortly after a Shiite shrine to Imam Askar was destroyed by bombs, gunmen shot and killed three Shiite brothers traveling in a vehicle.  The attack occurred west of the shrine in a village in the Imam Ways region.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen attacked a police patrol in Hawija, east of Kirkuk, killing one policeman and a bystander.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
In Kashmore, unidentified assailants damaged a gas pipeline servicing areas from Kandh Kot to Gaddo Thermal Power Station.  No injuries were reported in the incident.Note: Incident date is approximate.
The al-Quds Brigades, the military wing of Palestine Islamic Jihad (PIJ) claimed responsibility for firing a rocket at the Israeli settlement of Sederot.  No casualties were reported.
A car bomb detonated in the al-Wasiti residential area of Kirkuk, killing four people and wounding thirteen others.  The attack may have had sectarian motivations.  It was the sixth car bombing in Kirkuk in July and one of two car bombings in the city on this day.
Gunmen shot and killed two barbers in al-Miqdadiyah City.  Insurgents often target barbers who give western-style haircuts or shave men's' beards, acts they consider to be against Islamic law.
Insurgents kidnapped seven people, including two policemen, traveling in an ambulance near Tuz Kharmatu.  They then killed one of the policemen and a civilian.  The remaining five victims were released after being tortured.
An explosive device targeting a police patrol in the al-Mu'alimin area of western Baqubah detonated, killing one policeman and injuring a civilian.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A suicide bomber drove a booby-trapped car into an Iraqi police patrol in Mosul, killing himself and a policeman and wounding three other police.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed a policeman in Baiji.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A percussion bomb detonated outside an office of the Justice and Development Party (AKP), in the town of Sahinbey, in Gaziantep.  There were no reported casualties.  No further information is available.
Gunmen opened fire on municipal street cleaners in Baghdad, killing one and wounding two others.  Attacks on street cleaners are frequent in Iraq, as street cleaners often find and report bombs hidden in trash along streets.  Because many of these workers are Shiite, these attacks also have sectarian motivations.
Gunmen shot and killed Brigadier General Fakhri Jamil of the new intelligence service in al-Yarmouk, western Baghdad.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.The Mujahideen Shura Council later claimed responsibility for the attack.
Gunmen shot and killed Ma'ad Jihad, an advisor to the undersecretary of health, in the Al-Mansur area of Baghdad.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.
On July 31, suspected members of the Communist Party of India Marxist-Leninist-New Democracy (an extreme leftist organization) shot and killed the Telangana Rashtra Samithi District Committee Leader, identified as Rupu Reddy Ravinder Reddy, in the Gandhamapalli area of Khammam District.  Four others were injured in the attack.
The Izzedine Al Qassam Brigades, the military wing of Hamas, claimed responsibility for firing two rockets into the al Farahein region of Israel.  No casualties were reported.
The al-Quds Brigades, the military wing of Palestine Islamic Jihad (PIJ), claimed responsibility for firing two rockets on the Israeli settlement of Sederot.  No casualties were reported.
The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for firing two rockets at the Yad Mordechai kibbutz.  No casualties were reported.
Gunmen stormed a bus carrying nine family members from Najaf along an agricultural road between Rashid and Yussefiya.  The militants opened fire on the family, killing five and wounding four.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen shot and killed a member of the Arab Consultant Council, an organization of Arab, Kirkuk-based tribes and parties.  Attacks on political and tribal leaders are frequent in Iraq.  The attack also may have had sectarian motivations.
In Srinagar, a grenade attack at a bus stop in the Batmaloo area injured ten people, including seven Amarnath pilgrims.Note: The Amarnath Pilgrimage is a sacred Hindu journey to the cave of Lord Shiva in southern Kashmir during the months of late June, July, and early August.Note: Incident date is approximate.
Police found the bodies of eleven people, all with bullet holes and signs of torture, in Suwayra, south of Baghdad.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
Three grenades detonated near a police checkpoint in Al-Tayaran square in central Baghdad, killing three workers and wounding nine others.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Two bombs hidden in gym bags underneath bleachers at a soccer field in west Baghdad exploded, killing sixteen people and wounding at least fourteen others.  Spectators had been watching a soccer match between local teams.  All of the victims were children between the ages of 11 and 25. The attack took place near a police station and may have had sectarian motivations.  One day after the attack, a third device exploded on the same football field but caused no injuries, as the area was deserted.  It is unclear if this was a second attack or if a third explosive meant to detonate earlier failed to do so.
On August 2, unidentified assailants set fire to a secondary school located in the Bazarak District of Panjsher Province.  Although the building suffered extensive damage in the fire, no casualties or injuries were reported.
A police officer driving his car near the village of Mayskiy in North Ossetia was shot at, wounding him in the arm and the head and leaving him in critical condition.
The military wing of Hamas claimed responsibility for firing a rocket on the Israeli settlement of Magen.  No casualties were reported.
A car bomb exploded near a police patrol in the Al-Thawrah neighborhood of Mosul, wounding one policeman.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in Latifiyah detonated, wounding two policemen.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
On August 3, unidentified assailants used a suicide car bomb to blow up a bazaar in the Panjwayi District of Kandahar.  The explosion killed twenty one civilians and injured thirteen others.  Although there was a NATO convoy traveling through Panjwayi at the time, it was located several hundred yards away from the site of the blast.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) activated a car bomb near a police station. Four police officers were killed.  A fifth body is thought to be that of the perpetrator who detonated the car bomb.  15 others were wounded, including civilians.This attack may be in response to the upcoming presidential ceremony for Alvaro Uribe.Other sources: Caracol TV, 4 Aug
Gunmen opened fire on a crowd of people in the Doura district of southern Baghdad, killing two people and wounding four others.  Police speculate that the crowd may have been made up of people who had participated in a rally called by the Shiite cleric Moqtada al-Sadr in support of Hezbollah.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
A small percussion grenade detonated outside a branch of the Oyakbank in the city of Adana.  The small blast injured two security guards at the bank, but caused a commotion and brought first responders to the area.  A second device detonated six minutes later nearby, injuring many more people.  The Kurdistan Freedom Hawks (TAK) claimed responsibility for the twin blasts, stating that the bank was targeted because of its ties to the Turkish military.  Oyakbank is owned by the Turkish military's pension fund.  In their statement of claim, the group states that this attack was a reprisal, for the fascist treatment of chairman Apo [Abdullah Ocalan] and our people.
Palestinian militants fired a rocket on the Israeli settlement of Sederot.  The device landed in a swimming pool in a community near the settlement.  Several people suffered from shock and a number of vehicles were damaged.
Nine bodies were found in Baghdad with signs of torture.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen abducted a Shiite family from the predominately Sunni Dora district of Baghdad.  Their bodies were found later in the day.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
An office of the Regional Environmental Directorate, in Bastia, on the island of Corsica, was the target of an explosive attack.  About 20 kg of explosives were planted on the ground floor of the building and caused extensive material damages when they detonated.  This was one of five explosive attacks on the island on this night.  The Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC)-22 October Wing claimed responsibility for this attack on 16 October.  The group claimed sixteen other attacks on the island in the same communiqu.
An explosive charge, which was planted at the town hall in Calvi, on the island of Corsica, failed to detonate.  According to experts, the explosive mixture was faulty and the firing mechanism failed to fully detonate.  This was one of five explosive attacks to take place on the island on this day.  Police believe all five attacks were perpetrated by the same group.
The Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade and the Al-Quds Brigades, the armed wing of Palestine Islamic Jihad (PIJ), claimed joint responsibility for firing two rockets on the Israeli settlement of Sederot.  The Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade also claimed a separate attack on Sederot on this day.  No casualties were reported.Note, while the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade is often linked to Fatah, the relationship between the two groups is not always clear.
A bomb targeting a police patrol exploded in the Al-Jihad district of Baghdad, wounding four people, including two policemen.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded outside a coffee shop in the Baladruz district of Baqubah, causing a fire but no injuries.  The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen in Samarra attacked a convoy of Iraqi trucks transporting supplies to American forces, killing two drivers.  They then set the vehicles on fire.  Attacks on trucks transporting goods are frequent in Iraq, as insurgents try to disrupt Iraq's reconstruction.
Gunmen in Fallujah shot and killed Sheikh Ali Hussein Shalash, a preacher and member of the Sunni Association of Muslim Scholars.  Attacks on religious officials are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
On August 6, unidentified gunmen attacked a French charity office in Muttur, killing fifteen local aid workers who were working inside.  Two days later, two more bodies were found in the area, raising the number killed in the attack to seventeen.
A vehicle, belonging to an Italian construction company, was the target of an attempted explosive attack in Ajaccio, on the island of Corsica.  A device, made of a dynamite charge, fizzled out and caused no damages.  The vehicle was parked in a public parking lot in the town center.  No group has claimed responsibility.
The Al-Asifa Brigades, often linked to Fatah, claimed responsibility for launching two rockets of the Israeli settlement of Sederot.  No casualties were reported. Note, while the Al-Asifa Brigades are often linked to Fatah, the relationship between the two groups is not always clear.
A Megafon cell phone base station in the village of Kerla-Yurt  was blown up by unknown attackers.  This attack occurred practically at the same time as four other attacks across Chechnya and preceded another attack later that day.  The attack did not cause any injury or significant disruptions in cell phone service in the region.
Gunmen in two vehicles attacked a barber shop in Baghdad, killing its owner and four customers.  Attacks on barber shops are frequent in Iraq as insurgents believe that shaving men's beards and giving western-style hair cuts violate Islamic law.Xinhua, a Chinese daily, reported that the gunmen planted an explosive device that killed one and wounded three others.  Insurgents often coordinate attacks to target first responders, however, this attack was not reported by any other source and could not be confirmed.
Gunmen attacked a police officer in the Nahr al-Shaykh area, north of Baqubah, however the policemen survived.  Details regarding the nature of the attack were not available.
Insurgents attacked Colonel Hashim Ahmad, the head of the Bani Sa'd police department.  Ahmad survived the attack, however one civilian was killed and seven others, including two policemen, were wounded.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Senator Fakrutdin Boto, of Narathiwat, was shot and severely injured by a pillion rider in the Tanyongmat Market in Rangae District.
Gunmen attacked a police patrol in al-Miqdadiyah, killing four policeman and a fifteen-year-old boy and wounding five civilians.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
An explosive device targeting a police patrol exploded in Tikrit, killing one policeman and injuring ten other people, including three police.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.Ansar al-Sunnah claimed responsibility for detonating an explosive targeting a police patrol near Al-Atba Street in Tikrit on this day.  The group stated that one policeman was killed and six were injured.
Three bombs exploded in central Baghdad near the Interior Ministry.  The first attack targeted a police patrol.  The other devices exploded near a second police patrol and near a busy bus station.  The attacks on police wounded three policemen; numbers for each individual attack were not available.  Nine people were killed and another eight were wounded in the bombing near the bus station.
On August 8, suspected members of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) set off a bomb explosion that targeted a vehicle carrying former Eelam People's Democratic Party (EPDP) Parliamentarian S. Sivadasan through the Milagiriya area of Colombo.  Three people, including Sivadasan, died in the explosion while eight others were injured.
The motorcade of Adilgerey Magomedtagirov was bombed as he was travelling to the scene of the attack on Dagestani Head prosecutor Bitar Bitarov in Buinaksk.  Two bombs went off as he was driving through the village of Talgi, injuring three of his bodyguards, two of whom later died of their wounds.  The Dagestani Shari'ah Jamaat has taken responsibility for both attacks according to a statement on Kavkaz-Tsentr.
On August 9, suspected Taliban gunmen shot and killed a local tribesman in Angoor Ada for supposedly spying for American troops.  Preceding the incident, the victim had received several warnings from the Taliban for several months.
On August 9, unidentified assailants blew up a gas pipeline in the Sui gas field, interrupting the supply of gas to several areas in Sindh.  This is the second attack in the last two days.
On August 10, a group of Taliban gunmen attacked a police patrol in the Shekh Qalandar area of Panjwai District.  According to police, eight police personnel were killed in the attack and seven others were injured.  Police report killing twelve Taliban gunmen in the incident.  Following the attack, Taliban spokesman Qari Mohammad Yousuf claimed responsibility for the attack, though cited different figures (25 police killed, 2 Taliban killed)
Gunmen attacked a police patrol in Baghdad and then took refuge in the Turkey bin Talal Mosque.  They continued to fire on police from the mosque, killing a police colonel and two other policemen.  Police were eventually able to arrest three of the gunmen.  One insurgent was injured in the exchange of fire.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
On August 10, unidentified assailants blew up a bridge located in the Omach area which helped to connect Quetta and Karachi.  The explosion interrupted traffic between the two cities, but no injuries were reported.
Over ten gunmen seized expat workers from Goodfellas nightclub in Port Harcourt on August 13.  Different reports indicate between five and six people were kidnapped.  All the workers were westerners and confirmed reports indicate that one of the victims was American, Royce Parfait.  All the hostages were released by August 23 unharmed.  Ransoms have historically been paid to free hostages.Violence in the Niger Delta has been on rise possibly due to the 2007 Presidential Election.
Unknown assailants left a dynamite inside a box in front of former mayor Juan Rosas Camacho's house. Information in the report included that  Camacho has been in disagreement with farmer unions over the misuse of funds, however, no  link of these unions was made to the attack.  The suspicious package was reported and when the bomb squad opened the box, they found a faulty fuse.  There were no injuries or fatalities.
The Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade claimed responsibility for firing two rockets on the Israeli city of Ashqelon.  No casualties were reported.Note, while the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade is often linked to Fatah, the relationship between the two groups is not always clear.
On August 12, suspected members of the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) threw a grenade at the railway colony area of Bamunimaidan, injuring seven people in the blast.  Security forces have been active in the area recently in order to thwart attempts by the ULFA to interrupt Independence Day celebrations scheduled for August 15.
A bomb targeting a police patrol detonated near the Al-Nedaa mosque in eastern Baghdad, wounding five policemen.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on a market in central Baqubah, killing three people.  Attacks on public areas, especially markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A bomb exploded outside a store in Basra that sells CDs with sermons and interviews of Shiite cleric Muqtada al-Sadr, killing two people and wounding four others.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen shot and killed Nabil Ghaithan, director of the post office of the Muthanna district, in Samawa.  Attacks on those who work for the government are frequent in Iraq.
A policeman was shot to death while leaving his house to go to work in Narathiwat's Rusoh District.
Unidentified assailants set off a bomb along the outside wall of a girls' convent school in Khojak Road area of Patel Bagh.  The explosion damaged the wall, but no injuries were reported.Note: Incident date is approximate.
Twelve bodies, each with gunshot wounds and signs of torture, were found in Suwayra, southeast of Baghdad.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen shot and killed a colonel in the Oil Protection Facilities, a security force that protects oil installments in Iraq, as he was at a gas station north of Tikrit.  Attacks on the oil industry are frequent in Iraq as insurgents attempt to disrupt one of the country's most profitable industries.
Blasts aboard a trolleybus in Tiraspol killed two people (a six-year old girl and a sixty-nine year-old man) and injured eleven more.  There were two grenade detonators found in the bus after the explosion.  A likely motive for this is ethnic tensions in the Transdniester region, of which Tiraspol is the capital, between ethnic Moldovans and ethnic Russians.  Russia exerts a significant amount of influence on the republic, something the Moldovan government resents.
On August 14, an unidentified man with a bomb attached to his bicycle drove into a police car in Logar Province, causing a small explosion that damaged the police vehicle and caused injury to the bomber.  Earlier in the day, another bicycle suicide bomber struck against NATO soldiers in Kabul.Note: Incident Location is approximate
An explosive device targeting a bus detonated along the main road between Al-Khalis and Al-Jizani, killing two people and wounding three others.  Attacks on transportation networks are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen kidnapped the son of a tribal chief in Fallujah.  Tribal leaders and their families are often the target of insurgent attack as many are active in local politics.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) claimed responsibility for a gas cylinder bomb attack.  The targets were gasoline storage tanks at Ayatawacoop cooperative, which the FARC claim is the source of financing for the paramilitaries.  The cooperative is run by indigenous families in the area in agreement with Colombian state run Ecopetrol and Venezuelan state run PDVSA to facilitate the legal movement of gasoline across the border. Local people claimed that the cooperative funds were being funneled to the paramilitaries, and Uribe responded by putting in an inspector to monitor the funds.  In addition, with the demobilization of the paramilitaries, the governor has received more death threats from FARC.  The bombs missed their target and hit 88 tankers (most of which belonged to indigenous families).  The tankers were burned by the six bombs. Two shells of cooking gas cylinders hit a house and wounded an adult and child.Other sources: ACAN EFE 16Aug, El Tiempo 16Aug, Caracol Radio 14 Aug,Caracol TV 14 Aug, Panorama Digital 15 Aug
Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) found and defused four explosive devices placed along the separation barrier in central Gaza.  No casualties were reported.
Gunmen shot and killed police lieutenant Fadhil Uthman while he was getting into a car in Baqubah.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
As police arrived at the scene of an earlier attack on police that wounded three people, another device detonated, wounding a policeman and one civilian.  Insurgents often coordinate follow-on attacks targeting first responders.
Gunmen in Diyala fired shots at Latif Challub, the director of the Sports Activities Department.  Challub was not harmed, but two civilians were wounded in the drive-by shooting.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.
A suicide car bomber detonated his explosives outside the Mosul office of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, the party of Iraqi president Jalal Talabani, killing himself and nine others.  At least 41 people were wounded.  The attack damaged the building and set 17 cars on fire.  Attacks on government buildings and political party headquarters are frequent in Iraq.The Mujahideen Council later claimed responsibility for the bombing.  The group stated that two operatives carried out the attack; one opened fire on guards while the other drove the truck through the main gate.  The statement added that both men were killed in the attack.
A bomb targeting a police patrol in Kut detonated, wounding two policemen.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Unknown gunmen opened fire on a convoy of workers from the USPI road building company as it traveled on the Herat-Farah highway toward Heart on August 15.  Two workers were injured in the attack.  Convoys of the USPI company have come under attack in the past.
The Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade and the National Resistance Brigades, the armed wing of the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine, claimed joint responsibility for firing two rockets on the Israeli settlement of Sederot.  No casualties were reported.  Israeli radio reported that at least two rockets were fired from the Gaza Strip on this day.Note, while the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade is often linked to Fatah, the relationship between the two groups is not always clear.
Gunmen kidnapped Sayf Abd-al-Jabbar al-Tamimi, editor of the Turkoman Front affiliated Al-Ikha newspaper.  Attacks on journalists are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen attacked the Basra Governorate Council and engaged in armed clashes with police.  No damage or casualties were reported.  Attacks on government offices are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol exploded in Baqubah, killing one policeman and wounding three others.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Members of the Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK) kidnapped two construction workers, Abdullah Demir and Hanefi Aydimn.  PKK members abducted the victims from a road widening project in the Genc area of Bingol province.  The victims were held for two days before they were released.  It is unclear why the PKK chose to kidnap these men.
A car bomb exploded in an outdoor market in Sadr City, Baghdad's largest Shiite district, killing seven people and wounding fifteen others.  The blast destroyed shops and stalls, but killed relatively few people, as the market was not as crowded as usual because of the midday heat.  Attacks on markets and public areas are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A bomb targeting a police patrol exploded in the Al-Mu'allimin area of al-Miqdadiyah, killing one policeman and wounding four others, including a lieutenant.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
After clashing with gunmen at a checkpoint in Babil province, Iraqi army soldiers found three kidnapped police officers in the trunk of a vehicle.  The men stated that they had been abducted with two other officers.  The whereabouts of the two other policemen are unknown.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Police suspect that at least two Muslim insurgents were involved in the bombing of a road-side food stall where two policemen were eating breakfast when the explosion occurred. The bomb was hidden under the food stall, which was situated directly across from the Yala Provincial Hospital. Five bystanders and two policemen were injured by the blast, one of whom was in critical condition. The explosion destroyed the food stall, four motorcycles, and a car parked in the vicinity.
Police arrested a suspected member of the Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG) for refusing to open his backpack as he boarded a ferry on Jolo Island. Explosives and a total of 6,000 blasting caps were confiscated from the backpack and the police also found a detonation chord in one of the suspect's pockets. Authorities cleared the ferry of passengers and crew to conduct an inspection of the premises, but no further explosives were found. Ports in the southern Philippines were placed on high alert after the incident.
Police fired on a group of suspected Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK) members who were preparing an armed attack against the Security Directorate building in Muradiya, Van province.  The assailants left their small weapons behind, including a light antitank weapon, when they fled the scene.
Police found five bodies, all with gunshot wounds, in Mahmudiyah.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
Abdol Karim Haqdost was shot and killed along with his bodyguard in Herat Province on August 18 by unidentified gunmen.  Haqdost was a former commander of the Hezb-e Eslami (Islamic Party).  Haqdost was reported as returning home from a party in the Gozara District when the attack occurred.
An explosive device, which may have been timed, detonated at the Turkey-Iran natural gas pipeline, in the city of Taslicay, in Agri province.  The strong explosion caused a major fire that was extinguished by fire brigades.  As a result of the attack, the inlet and outlet valves of the pipeline were closed down.  There were no reported casualties, though local villagers moved from their houses during the fire.  Police are blaming the attack on members of the Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK).
Gunmen shot and killed at least seven Shiite pilgrims who were arriving in Baghdad to commemorate the death of Imam Musa al-Kadhim, the seventh imam of Shiite Islam. On 21 August, at least 22 pilgrims were killed by gunmen as they walked to or from the shrine.  Attacks on religious processions and festivals are frequent in Iraq and almost always have sectarian motivations.  In 2005, upwards of one thousand people were killed when crowds stampeded after rumors that suicide bombers were planning to attack worshippers on their way to the al-Kadhim mosque.
A bomb exploded outside a home owned by a government official in the Al-Wajihiyah sub-district of eastern Baqubah.  No casualties were reported.  Attacks on government leaders are frequent in Iraq.
Attackers killed three policemen at a police station in Nalgonda, near Hyderabad.  Another policeman was said to be critically injured.  The police were tied to trees outside the station before being shot.  The gunmen then bombed the station.  According to the report, the attackers shouted statements that seemed to indicate the killings were in response to a police operation last month.   The attackers were identified by the media as Maoist rebels, although no one has claimed responsibility for the incident.Another report indicated that the gunmen were members of the Communist Party of India-Maoist (CPI-Maoist).
A suicide car bomber crashed his vehicle into a Shiite mosque in Baghdad's Doura district, killing himself and one other person.  Four others were wounded.  Attacks on religious shrines are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Gunmen shot and killed two policemen in the Al-Tahrir area of Baqubah.  The men were brothers.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A major gas pipeline in the Loti gas field was damaged by an explosion on August 20.  The gas field is located about 280 miles southeast of Quetta.  Although no one claimed responsibility for the blast, reports indicated that the attack was carried out by tribal rebels in the area.  The attack disrupted local gas supplies.  This was the fourth gas pipeline attack in Balochistan province this month.  Attacks on infrastructure and government buildings have occurred regularly in the province over the last couple of years.  No one was injured in the August 20 explosion.
The Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade and the National Resistance Brigades, the armed wing of the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine, claimed joint responsibility for firing three rockets on the Kissufim crossing.  No casualties were reported.Note, while the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade is often linked to Fatah, the relationship between the two groups is not always clear.
Gunmen kidnapped Hawwash Khalaf Mut'ib, the legal adviser to the head of the Iraqi Sunni Waqf [religious endowment] office.  Mut'ib was abducted from his home in Al-Karradah by gunmen wearing security uniforms.   Attacks on religious institutions and their employees are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Four Islamic insurgents riding on motorcycles attacked a truck carrying eight workers from the government Irrigation Department in front of a crowded tea shop in Pattani's Yaring district. The assailants fired AK47 rifles at the workers, injuring one and killing another.
Gunmen shot and killed a Shiite engineer in Baghdad.  Insurgents often target professionals, particularly professors and engineers, in order to disrupt Iraq's reconstruction.  The attack could also have had sectarian motivations.
A bomb exploded near vendors selling cloth in Al-Tayaran Square in Baghdad, killing two people and wounding nine others.  Attacks on public spaces, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Gunmen attacked a former member of Saddam Hussein's Baath party in Kut, injuring him.  Attacks on former members of Hussein's regime are frequent in Iraq.
A pipeline at a petroleum processing plant in the village of Voznesenskaya in the Malgobeck area was bombed, resutling in an oil spill and a fire.  Firefighters took three hours to put out the fire; there were no injuries or casualties.
A remote-controlled explosive device injured four policemen when it was detonated in Silan village in the Kama District.  The incident occurred on the morning of August 23.
A roadside bomb exploded near the convoy of Interior Minister Jawad al-Bolani, killing two civilians and wounding several traffic police.  Al-Bolani was not hurt in the blast.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.  Note, exact injury numbers were not given.  It should also be noted that a US army patrol was nearby at the time of the attack.
Gunmen attacked a police station in Mosul.  One militant, dressed in a police uniform, blew himself up outside the station, wounding six policemen.  Shortly after, gunmen fired on the station.  Iraqi and American forces intervened, killing two insurgents.
A 35-year-old Muslim schoolteacher was shot dead in a drive-by shooting as he rode to work on his motorcycle Wednesday morning. At least four attackers, believed to be Muslim insurgents, trailed behind the victim in a pick-up truck. They shot him several times before leaving the scene. The victim later died at the hospital.  A village defense volunteer was also killed in this area on this day.  It is unclear if the attacks were coordinated.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) attempted to blow up the Santa Lucia Bridge on the Pitalito-Mocoa road.  The Colombian Army surprised the group and thwarted the attack.  Two FARC members were killed.
A suicide car bomber detonated his explosives near the entrance to the Al-Rashad police station in the Al-Mashtal neighborhood of Baghdad, killing himself and two civilians and wounding nine people, including two police.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Police found the bodies of five family members in Mosul.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.Note, the tactic and weapon were not given.
Gunmen kidnapped an Italian oil worker and two others in Port Hartcourt.  During the kidnapping the Italian's bodyguard was killed in a gun battle.  The three men were released on August 29.
At least one rocket fell in the industrial zone of southern Ashqelon.  No damage or casualties were reported. The Al-Quds Brigades, the armed wing of Palestine Islamic Jihad (PIJ), claimed responsibility for firing two rockets on Ashqelon.  As an industrial city, Ashqelon is frequently targeted in rocket attacks.
Gunmen shot and killed a policeman in Samarra.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed a policeman in Mosul.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Mujahideen Shura Council claimed responsibility for shooting at least two policemen in Mosul on this day.
Gunmen attacked a Shiite family in Baqubah, killing two women and two children, and wounding eleven other people.  The family had received death threats and were moving from their home at the time of the attack.
A bomb targeting the convoy of the police chief of Taraklan, in Kirkuk, detonated, wounding the chief and four of his guards.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Police officers were targeted by a hand grenade while they were guarding the Eelam People's Democratic Party in Vavuniya.  Reports attributed the attack to the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), although no one was injured.
A bomb attached to a motorcycle detonated in a popular Basra market, killing seven people and wounding ten others.  Attacks on public spaces, markets in particular, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A bomb exploded near an Interior Ministry commando patrol in western Samarra, but did not result in any casualties.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A suicide car bomber detonated his explosives outside the Al-Sabah newspaper building in downtown Baghdad, killing himself and two others and wounding twenty people.   The bomber was cleared to enter the compound in his vehicle at around 8:30am.  Guards become suspicious of the man, but before they could fire on him, he detonated his explosives.  The blast destroyed dozens of vehicles and damaged upwards of one quarter of the building.  The executive editor of Al-Sabah speculated that the newspaper was targeted because it organized a meeting where television and newspaper editors signed a 'pledge of honor' to respect the government's reconciliation efforts.  Al-Sabah is Iraq's largest newspaper and is funded by the Shiite-led Iraqi government.  This was the second attack on the paper; in May a suicide bomber killed himself and one other person at the office's main vehicle check-point.
The home of a local police commander was targeted in coordinated suicide bomb attacks in Kirkuk.  The attack occurred just minutes after, and only one half mile from where a suicide bomber detonated his vehicle outside the home of Peyrut Talabani, a cousin of President Talabani.   A total of nine people were killed in the attacks; 22 others were wounded.Also in Kirkuk on this day, a suicide car bomber detonated his explosives outside the building housing President Jalal Talabani's Patriotic Union of Kurdistan Party, killing himself and two guards and wounding sixteen party members.Note: casualty numbers are for both attacks combined.
Two security officials were killed when a remote-controlled roadside bomb targeted their vehicle in Khost Province.  The province's police chief identified one of the officials as a police officer and the other as an intelligence official.  Four people, identified as two security officials and two civilians, were also injured in the attack.  A Taliban spokesperson claimed responsibility for the incident.
Twenty-one people, including ten Britons, were injured when an explosive device ripped through a tourist minibus in Marmaris.  This was one of three bomb blasts in the city on this day.  The Kurdistan Freedom Hawks claimed responsibility for these blasts and another in Istanbul, stating that It must be realized that the holding in captivity of our historic leader Chairman Apo [Abdullah Ocalan] is in itself the rationale for our destructive acts of revenge against the bloodsucking, colonialist, and fascist TC.  One suspect, being identified as Memet Y. was captured following a tip from his father.  Memet's fingerprints matched those found at the scene of the attack.
A suicide bomber killed 17 people on August 28 when he blew himself up in a market across from a police station in Lashkar Gah in Helmand Province.  47 people were wounded in the blast.  No one has claimed responsibility for the attack.  Suicide bombings have been relatively frequent in Afghanistan recently, although they have generally targeted troops in the region instead of civilians.
Presumed members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) detonated a low-intensity device at a police post in Buenaventura.  This is the 26th incident in the city and the 5th at this police post in the pat year.
Gunmen shot and killed a policeman in Mosul.  This was one of three attacks on police in the city on this day.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in Baghdad detonated, killing one policeman and wounding two others.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Security officers arrested three members of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) who were discovered as they were boarding a ferry bound for Manila from the Maguindanao region in the southern Philippines. The men were found to be carrying two homemade bombs on their persons.The local police chief identified the three men as members of the MILF special operations group. The police claim that the three men admitted that they were on route to carry out  attacks in metro Manila. A spokesperson for the MILF denied that the group was involved or had any knowledge of the planned bombings. Security officials were also looking into possible links with the Abu Sayyah Group (ASG).
A bomb exploded at a hotel in Hub on August 29.  The explosion killed four people and injured six.  No one claimed responsibility for the attack.  The incident occurred during a time of upset in the region in the days after Pakistan's security forces killed Balochistan tribal chief Nawab Akbar Bugti in an air strike on August 26.
Militants attacked an office of Shiite cleric Moqtada al-Sadr in Baqubah with three mortar shells, two rocket-propelled grenades (RPGs), and a bomb, killing two guards and destroying the building.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen attacked traffic policemen in Baqubah, killing one and wounding another.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen attacked two mobile communication towers in two areas of western Baqubah.  Attacks on communications infrastructure are frequent in Iraq as insurgents attempt to disrupt the country's reconstruction.
Gunmen shot and killed Sheikh Qusai al-Ramah, the prayer and sermon leader of the Malahawesh Sunni mosque in Baghdad, as he left evening prayers.  Attacks on religious leaders are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Taliban members claimed responsibility for the beheading of Haq Nawaz (also known as Dactar), who they accused of being a spy for Afghanistan.  Dactar's body was found near Miramshah one kilometer from the North Waziristan Agency headquarters on August 30.  The body was left with a chit identifying the body as a gift for Afghan President Karzai.
A bomb placed on a bus detonated in Kirkuk, killing three people, including the perpetrator, and wounding eleven others.  Attacks on transportation systems are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.  It was unclear if the attack was a deliberate suicide attempt or if the individual was unable to exit the bus before the device exploded.
Two bombs exploded in downtown Baghdad near a gas station while a police patrol was passing.  The blast killed three police officers and wounded fourteen people.  Some media reports stated that the first blast targeted the gas station and that the second explosion was a separate, coordinated attack targeting first responders.  Attacks on police, gas stations, and coordinated strikes targeting first responders are all frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen killed three Shiite brothers in Numaniya.  The men had fled from a Sunni region further north.  Attacks on families after they have fled or while they are fleeing sectarian violence is frequent in Iraq and almost always have sectarian motivations.
A police officer was shot at in Eravul by suspected Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) members on August 31.  The officer was injured in the attack.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives at a gas station in eastern Baghdad, killing himself and two other people, and wounding thirteen.  The attack occurred as a police patrol was in the area and several police were thought to be injured in the blast.  Attacks on gas stations are frequent in Iraq, as insurgents try to disrupt one of the country's most profitable industries.  Attacks on police are also common.Note, exact target is unknown.
Militants attacked a communications center in Fallujah with hand grenades.  One of the attackers was killed in the incident.  Attacks on telecommunication infrastructure are common in Iraq as insurgents try to disrupt the country's reconstruction.
Gunmen attacked two members of the Oil Ministry's security service as they drove in northeast Baghdad, killing one and wounding the other.  Attacks on the oil industry, especially attacks on employees and oil installations, are frequent in Iraq as insurgents try to disrupt one of the country's most profitable industries.
Militants attacked Shiite neighborhoods in Baghdad with car bombs and mortar fire.  Officials reported that at least seven explosions occurred between 6:00 and 6:30pm, killing upwards of 68 people and injuring 300 others.  The director of the counterterrorism unit at Iraq's Interior Ministry stated that militants targeted areas controlled by Shiite militias, in some cases renting apartments and stores in buildings where they planted remote-detonated explosives.  One car bomb went off in a market.  Officials also stated that attacks targeted a medical center housing doctor's offices in Sadr City's al-Hamza square and a telephone exchange building.  Note, casualties are for all attacks combined.
(Coordinated Attack: 2nd of 11 for Muang, 2 of 23 for Yala)Police believe that Muslim militants are responsible for a series of coordinated, small bomb attacks against 23 commercial banks across Yala province in southern Thailand. The bombs were planted in ATM booths and were detonated by remote timers within a five-minute span of time (11:30-11:35) late Thursday morning. At least one person was killed by the series of attacks and dozens were injured and taken to local hospitals for treatment. The militants disguised themselves as students in order to plant the bombs just a few minutes before the attacks transpired. The bombs were hidden inside handbags or within thick books that had the pages carved out. The bombings forced the closure of all banks and most schools throughout the province.There were eleven attacks alone in the Muang district of the provincial capital of Yala city. Police arrested two Muslim youths that were identified by ATM security cameras and confirmed that they are members of Bersatu  an ethnic Malay Muslim Extremist group that aims to carve an Islamic state from portions of Southern Thailand, Malaysia, and Indonesia. The attacks were timed to coincide with the 27th anniversary of the founding of the organization. The Thai government admitted that it anticipated terrorist attacks to celebrate the anniversary.
(Coordinated Attack: 6th of 11 for Muang, 6 of 23 for Yala)Police believe that Muslim militants are responsible for a series of coordinated, small bomb attacks against 23 commercial banks across Yala province in southern Thailand. The bombs were planted in ATM booths and were detonated by remote timers within a five-minute span of time (11:30-11:35) late Thursday morning. At least one person was killed by the series of attacks and dozens were injured and taken to local hospitals for treatment. The militants disguised themselves as students in order to plant the bombs just a few minutes before the attacks transpired. The bombs were hidden inside handbags or within thick books that had the pages carved out. The bombings forced the closure of all banks and most schools throughout the province.There were eleven attacks alone in the Muang district of the provincial capital of Yala city. Police arrested two Muslim youths that were identified by ATM security cameras and confirmed that they are members of Bersatu  an ethnic Malay Muslim Extremist group that aims to carve an Islamic state from portions of Southern Thailand, Malaysia, and Indonesia. The attacks were timed to coincide with the 27th anniversary of the founding of the organization. The Thai government admitted that it anticipated terrorist attacks to celebrate the anniversary.
(Coordinated Attack: 10th  of 11 for Muang, 10 of 23 for Yala)Police believe that Muslim militants are responsible for a series of coordinated, small bomb attacks against 23 commercial banks across Yala province in southern Thailand. The bombs were planted in ATM booths and were detonated by remote timers within a five-minute span of time (11:30-11:35) late Thursday morning. At least one person was killed by the series of attacks and dozens were injured and taken to local hospitals for treatment. The militants disguised themselves as students in order to plant the bombs just a few minutes before the attacks transpired. The bombs were hidden inside handbags or within thick books that had the pages carved out. The bombings forced the closure of all banks and most schools throughout the province.There were eleven attacks alone in the Muang district of the provincial capital of Yala city. Police arrested two Muslim youths that were identified by ATM security cameras and confirmed that they are members of Bersatu  an ethnic Malay Muslim Extremist group that aims to carve an Islamic state from portions of Southern Thailand, Malaysia, and Indonesia. The attacks were timed to coincide with the 27th anniversary of the founding of the organization. The Thai government admitted that it anticipated terrorist attacks to celebrate the anniversary.
(Coordinated Attack: 3 of 6 for Betong, 14 of 23 for Yala)Police believe that Muslim militants are responsible for a series of coordinated, small bomb attacks against 23 commercial banks across Yala province in southern Thailand. The bombs were planted in ATM booths and were detonated by remote timers within a five-minute span of time (11:30-11:35) late Thursday morning. At least one person was killed by the series of attacks and dozens were injured and taken to local hospitals for treatment. The militants disguised themselves as students in order to plant the bombs just a few minutes before the attacks transpired. The bombs were hidden inside handbags or within thick books that had the pages carved out. The bombings forced the closure of all banks and most schools throughout the province.There were six attacks  in the town of Betong in the province  of Yala. Police arrested two Muslim youths that were identified by ATM security cameras and confirmed that they are members of Bersatu  an ethnic Malay Muslim Extremist group that aims to carve an Islamic state from portions of Southern Thailand, Malaysia, and Indonesia. The attacks were timed to coincide with the 27th anniversary of the founding of the organization. The Thai government admitted that it anticipated terrorist attacks to celebrate the anniversary.
(Coordinated Attack: 1 of 2 for Yaha, 18 of 23 for Yala)Police believe that Muslim militants are responsible for a series of coordinated, small bomb attacks against 23 commercial banks across Yala province in southern Thailand. The bombs were planted in ATM booths and were detonated by remote timers within a five-minute span of time (11:30-11:35) late Thursday morning. At least one person was killed by the series of attacks and dozens were injured and taken to local hospitals for treatment. The militants disguised themselves as students in order to plant the bombs just a few minutes before the attacks transpired. The bombs were hidden inside handbags or within thick books that had the pages carved out. The bombings forced the closure of all banks and most schools throughout the province.There were two attacks total  in the town of Yaha in the province  of Yala. Police arrested two Muslim youths that were identified by ATM security cameras and confirmed that they are members of Bersatu  an ethnic Malay Muslim Extremist group that aims to carve an Islamic state from portions of Southern Thailand, Malaysia, and Indonesia. The attacks were timed to coincide with the 27th anniversary of the founding of the organization. The Thai government admitted that it anticipated terrorist attacks to celebrate the anniversary.
(Coordinated Attack: 1 of 2 for Raman, 22 of 23 for Yala)Police believe that Muslim militants are responsible for a series of coordinated, small bomb attacks against 23 commercial banks across Yala province in southern Thailand. The bombs were planted in ATM booths and were detonated by remote timers within a five-minute span of time (11:30-11:35) late Thursday morning. At least one person was killed by the series of attacks and dozens were injured and taken to local hospitals for treatment. The militants disguised themselves as students in order to plant the bombs just a few minutes before the attacks transpired. The bombs were hidden inside handbags or within thick books that had the pages carved out. The bombings forced the closure of all banks and most schools throughout the province.There were two attacks total  in the town of Raman in the province  of Yala. Police arrested two Muslim youths that were identified by ATM security cameras and confirmed that they are members of Bersatu  an ethnic Malay Muslim Extremist group that aims to carve an Islamic state from portions of Southern Thailand, Malaysia, and Indonesia. The attacks were timed to coincide with the 27th anniversary of the founding of the organization. The Thai government admitted that it anticipated terrorist attacks to celebrate the anniversary.
Three police officers were killed and two were injured from an attack in Greshk at the Sarband police post.  Further information on the attack is not yet available.  The Security Commander of Helmand Province identified the attackers as Taliban members.
A government official for the Manipur district was kidnapped from his office in Churachandpur.  The identities of the kidnappers are unknown.  The government official is Kh. Raghumani Singh.
Gunmen shot and killed a policeman in a town outside of Baghdad.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in Kirkuk detonated, seriously wounding three policemen.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Taliban gunmen killed a police security commander, his wife, and two police guards in Khak-e Safid in Farah Province on September 2.  The commander, Samad Khan, was head of a security checkpoint in Bagh-e Pol-E in Farah.  The gunmen attacked his vehicle as he was traveling home from vacation.  A spokesman for the Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack.
Gunmen shot and killed three traffic policemen at a bus terminal in Baqubah.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
When police and first responders arrived at the scene of a blast that killed two people in central Baghdad, a second bomb exploded, wounding three policemen.  Coordinated follow on attacks that target emergency personnel are frequently carried out by insurgents.Ansar al-Sunnah claimed responsibility for bombing a base used by the Mahdi Army, a Shiite militia, and then targeting police who responded to the attack with a second explosive.  The group stated that the attack occurred on 2 September, however did not state in which city the attack was carried out.
Two police officers were killed and three other officers injured in an attack in Paktika province on September 3.  The attack took place in Tarwa District.  There is no information yet on the type of attack, and no one has claimed responsibility for the incident.
A grenade-like explosive was throw into a bar in Jijiga, Ethiopia.  The blast killed the bar's owner and wounded seven other patrons.  The attack is believed to be linked to a series of unexplained bombings across Ethiopia over the last couple of months.No one claimed responsibility for the attacks.  The government believes Eritrea is behinds the attacks though the Eritrean government denies this.
Militants kidnapped Ghanim Ghudayer, a popular Iraqi soccer star considered to be one of the best players on Baghdad's Air Force Club team.  Ghudayer was also a member of Iraq's Olympic soccer team.  Attacks on athletes are not uncommon in Iraq: insurgents have targeted athletes and coaches throughout the country.  In July, Iraq's national soccer coach and his assistant resigned after receiving death threats and gunmen kidnapped the chairman of Iraq's National Olympic Committee along with fifty other officials.  The chairman's whereabouts remain unknown.
A government official was killed by insurgents as he traveled to work.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.Note, the tactic and weapon used are unknown.
The Al-Quds Brigades, the armed wing of Palestine Islamic Jihad (PIJ), claimed responsibility for opening fire on a vehicle belonging to an Israeli settler in the town of Ya'abed, southwest of Jenin.  The group stated that the attack was in retaliation for Israel's killing of Husam Jaradat, an Al-Quds Brigades leader.  The extent of casualties was unknown,  however a source stated that ambulances arrived at the scene and took the wounded to local hospitals.
A gas pipeline was blown up on September 4 near Sui in Balochistan.  The identities of those responsible for the attack are unknown.  The attack occurred during a period of protest and violence in the Balochistan region following the death of Baloch tribal leader Nawab Akbar Bugti by a military air strike at the end of August.
A car bomb detonated near a police patrol in Baghdad, killing two policemen and seriously wounding five civilians.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A 5kg bomb hidden along the roadside near a bridge in Takbai District of Narathiwat province exploded as a teacher protection unit passed by on Monday morning. The explosion left a one-meter-wide hole in the road. One soldier was critically injured and rushed to the hospital. The convey was in route to provide security for a local school when the attack occurred. A local Muslim militant group is believed to be responsible for the attack.
A bomb exploded outside the home of Sheikh Jasim Mumtaz, a tribal leader in Samarra, wounding five people. Sheikh Mumtaz was not hurt.  Media reports stated that the device was detonated remotely. Attacks on tribal leaders are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.  When police and first responders arrived at the scene, a second explosive device detonated, killing three people.  Insurgents often coordinate follow-on attacks targeting emergency personnel.
A roadside bomb targeting the convoy of independent politician Tariq al-Mamouri detonated as al-Mamouri was returning home in the Karrada neighborhood of central Baghdad.  Al-Mamouri was not harmed, however the blast seriously wounded one person.  Al-Mamouri is the head of the New Iraq Movement and was deputy head of the Iraqi Umma party.  Attacks on government leaders are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen attacked and killed three Shiite pilgrims in Baghdad as they were traveling to Karbala for religious ceremonies.  Attacks on religious pilgrims are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
On early Tuesday morning, a 61-year-old poultry farmer was shot dead and his house set on fire in the Panare district in the town of Pattani. The man's wife said that they were sleeping when several gunmen entered the home, opened fire at her husband, and set the house ablaze.Police found a note at the crime scene that read: You killed our innocent people. We'll kill your innocent people too. These leaflets are typically found next to the victims of shootings throughout the troubled South. Police linked this attack by Muslim militants to another shooting and a bombing on the same day.
Suspected gunmen from the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) shot at a  police officer from the Mannar Police station on September 6.  The officer, who was traveling on Pallaimunnai road, was injured in the attack.
A bomb exploded in southwestern Baghdad near a funeral ceremony for a supporter of Shiite cleric Moqtada al-Sadr, killing two people and wounding eight others.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen attacked the Al-Fattah mosque in Al-Bayya.  It was also reported that mortar shells fell in the area.  No casualties were reported.  Attacks on mosques and shrines are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A bomb exploded in the al-Qahirah (Cairo) section of northern Baghdad, killing eight people and wounding thirty-eight others.  Attacks on crowded, public spaces are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.  When police and first responders arrived at the scene, a second bomb exploded, but did not result in casualties.  Insurgents often coordinate follow-on attacks that target emergency personnel.
A police officer was shot and killed in his home in Kupwara on September 7.  The officer was identified as selection grade constable Abdul Gaffar Mir.  The gunmen have not been identified.
A bomb detonated near a restaurant in Baghdad, killing one person.  Attacks on public areas are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Gunmen in Hawija shot and killed a former leader of Saddam Hussein's Baath party.  Attacks on members of Hussein's former regime are frequent in Iraq.
An explosive device targeting a police patrol detonated near the al-Nida mosque in the predominately Shiite al-Qahira (Cairo) area of Baghdad.  Three civilians were killed and seventeen were wounded.  The attack came on the day that Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki and US commander General George Casey signed an accord that will begin transferring control of Iraq's armed forces to the Iraqi government.  Insurgents targeted police in several bomb attacks in Baghdad alone on this day.Note, some news sources stated that this was a suicide attack.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in the Karrada district of Baghdad detonated, killing one civilian and wounding two others.  The attack came on the day that Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki and US commander General George Casey signed an accord that will begin transferring control of Iraq's armed forces to the Iraqi government.  Insurgents targeted police in several bomb attacks in Baghdad alone on this day.The Mujahideen Shura Council claimed responsibility for several attacks on police in Baghdad on this day.
Explosions during a gathering at a Muslim burial ground near a mosque in Malegaon killed 37 people and injured at least 125 others on September 8.  People were gathered at the burial ground for a prayer service honoring Shab-e-Barat, a Muslim day of prayer for the dead.  Investigations indicate that three bombs exploded during the attack.  No one has claimed responsibility for the attack.
A car bomb in the Zayouna area of Baghdad detonated near the convoy of Colonel Ali Mohammed, the chief of police in Baghdad's Karrada district.  One policeman and one civilian were killed; six others, including four police, were wounded.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Mujahideen Shura Council claimed responsibility for the attack, however did not mention the presence on Colonel Mohammed.
A Colombian aid worker and two Afghan aid workers were kidnapped by unidentified gunmen around September 9 while they were traveling to Kabul from Behsud.  The workers were associated with the Madeira Welfare NGO.  No one has yet  claimed responsibility for the incident.
Gunmen shot and killed Abdel Karim al-Rubai of Al-Sabah, Iraq's state-run newspaper, and seriously wounded his driver as they were traveling to work in southern Baghdad.  Al-Sabah reported that it had received an e-mail from the Mujahideen Council, a group linked to al-Qaeda, threatening al-Rubai and his family.  The e-mail stated that leaders of the group were upset by al-Rubai's accusation that the Mujahideen Council was responsible for the August 27 attack on the newspaper that killed two people.  Journalists and media assistants are frequently targeted in Iraq.The Mujahideen Shura Council later claimed responsibility for the attack.
A car bomb targeting a police patrol detonated in the al-Qahirah (Cairo) area of northern Baghdad, killing a police officer and wounding four others.  Two civilians were also injured.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb on a bicycle exploded in Quetta on Prince Road outside of a restaurant on September 10.  Approximately 18 people were injured in the attack.  Both the target and perpetrator are unknown.  No one has issued a statement claiming responsibility for the incident.  The attack comes during a time of violence and protest in Balochistan where a Baloch tribal leader was killed at the end of August by a government air strike.
A police patrol was attacked by unidentified gunmen in Balkh province on September 10.  Three police officers were killed and two were injured in the attack.
Gunmen shot and killed police general Majeed al-Mani along with two of his bodyguards in Baqubah.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
After a gun battle with insurgents in Baghdad, police found more than a ton of explosives inside an electronics company building.  As the officers were leaving, a suicide car bomber detonated his explosives, killing three people and wounding fourteen others, many of them police.  Authorities state that Abu Jaafer al-Libei, an al Qaeda leader, was in the area and narrowly escaped before being captured.The attack was later claimed by the Mujahideen Council, an al Qaeda-affiliated group, stating that the incident was part of the 'Revenge Campaign for the Blood of Sheikh Abu-Mus'ab al-Zarqawi.'
Quetta, along with 15 other districts in Balochistan, lost power after four power pylons were blown up on September 11.  The power pylons were targeted near Aab-e-Gum, south of Quetta. No one claimed responsibility for the attacks.  Since the death of Baloch tribal leader Nawab Akbar Bugti by a government air strike at the end of August, the province of Balochistan has been marked by violence and protest.
Another bomb exploded in a market in Bannu on September 11, damaging video shops.  No one was injured in the blast.  A similar attack occurred on the same day in another Bannu market.  The district police identified the Taliban as being the likely perpetrator of the attack.  The video shop owners had been previously threatened over selling material deemed un-Islamic.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in Mosul detonated, wounding one civilian.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.Ansar al-Sunnah claimed responsibility for detonating an explosive near a police patrol in western Mosul on this day.  The Mujahideen Shura Council also claimed several attacks on police targets in western Mosul on this day.
A bomb targeting an electricity substation exploded, wounding five people.  Attacks on utility installations are frequent in Iraq, as insurgents attempt to disrupt the country's reconstruction.
Two suspected Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) gunmen shot at and injured two undercover police officers as they boarded a bus in Batticaloa on September 12.Update: The police officers died on Septmeber 13 from their injuries.
A bomb targeting a police patrol exploded in central Baghdad, killing one policeman and wounding three others.  Six civilians were also injured.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.Ansar al-Sunnah claimed responsibility for detonating an explosive device near a police patrol in the al-Sana'ah district of central Baghdad on this day.
Police found the body of Captain Udai Abdel-Rihda, an army official under Saddam Hussein, two days after he had been kidnapped in Mahmoudiyah.  Attacks on former Baathists are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen in two vehicles attacked the United States Embassy in Damascus.  Three perpetrators exited the first vehicle and threw hand grenades and fired automatic weapons at the compound's gate and a Syrian guard post.  The second vehicle, a truck filled with explosives, drove to a different gate, however the driver abandoned the vehicle after shooting broke out between Syrian guards and the three others perpetrators.  He was shot by security forces and arrested before the explosives could be detonated.  In total, three perpetrators and a Syrian guard were killed in the attack.  Ten civilians, three Syrian guards, the driver of the truck bomb, and a Chinese diplomat watching the events from the roof of the nearby Chinese embassy were wounded.  No Americans were harmed in the attack.  No group claimed responsibility for the attack, however some suspect Jund al-Sham, an al Qaeda offshoot.Syrian authorities later revealed that the group had no organizational links to outside organizations; however, much of the attack was planned in Saudi Arabia.  Abdul-Raouf Saleh, the alleged leader of the cell, began sending money from Saudi Arabia in 2004 to his brother, a cousin, and Ramzi Attef al-Shibly so that they could buy supplies for the attack.  The weapons purchased were reportedly from Lebanon.  Saleh returned on 7 July to assist with preparations in Syria.  The group allegedly planned on distributing a video of the attack, referring to themselves as the Abu Musab al-Zarqawi Battalion.
A police convoy in Farah province came under attack by suspected Taliban members on September 13.  Four police officers were killed and 11 were injured in the attack.  Four suspected Taliban members were also killed.
A bomb targeting a police patrol in eastern Baghdad detonated, killing twelve people and wounding thirty-four.  Reports state that the patrol, tasked to protect power installations, was passing a police station at the time of the incident.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Mujahideen Shura Council claimed responsibility for detonating explosives targeting two police patrols in downtown Baghdad on this day.
A government official, Aurangzeb Gandapur, was kidnapped from the Mirali town of North Waziristan on September 13.  Gandapur is an official with the Rural Development Department and was inspecting a school before he was kidnapped.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in Al-Musayyib detonated, wounding three policemen.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen attacked a police patrol in central Baqubah, killing two policemen.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen attacked a police checkpoint in the al-Tahrir area of central Baqubah, killing two policemen.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A gunman fired on a vehicle carrying an official from the Japanese Embassy in Baghdad.  No one was wounded in the attack.  Attacks on foreign embassies and their staff are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed Colonel Muthanna Ali Husayn, a senior policeman, while he was in front of his home in southern Baghdad.  Husayn was responsible for managing the flow of traffic in and out of Baghdad's Green Zone, the area of the capital housing the Iraqi government and foreign embassies.
A fragmentation bomb detonated near an officer lodging complex in Baskale, Van province.  The blast shattered windows in nearby houses but there were no reported casualties.
A unit of the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade claimed responsibility for firing a rocket on the Israeli city of Ashqelon.  Israeli radio reported that two rockets landed in open areas in the western Negev on this day.  No casualties were reported.Note, the Al-Aqsa Martyrs  Brigade is often linked to Fatah, however the relationship between the two is not always clear.
A bomb placed in a football (soccer) field in Fallujah exploded, killing four people and wounding six others.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.  Insurgents have targeted football fields in the past, as they often attract large groups of Iraqis, particularly children.
Gunmen kidnapped Amid al-Douri, the brother of Sabir al-Douri, from his home in a predominately Shiite district of Baghdad.  Sabir al-Douri was once Iraq's director of military intelligence and is now on trial for committing genocide against the Kurds in 1980.  Attacks on members of the former Hussein regime are frequent in Iraq.
A homemade fragmentation bomb, set by timer, was placed near the wall of a police post in Gaziantep, where it exploded.  The blast damaged two cars parked nearby, but caused no casualties.
The Al-Quds Brigades, the armed wing of Palestine Islamic Jihad, claimed responsibility for firing two rockets on the Israeli settlement of Nativ Ha'asara.  Israeli radio reported that one rocket landed in the Negev on this day.  No casualties were reported.
Three workers from a non-governmental organization (NGO) driving in a vehicle in Musayi were killed by a remote-controlled bomb on September 16.  A fourth worker in the vehicle was injured.  The workers were Afghan employees of the CCI NGO.  An Interior Ministry official said that the Taliban was responsible for the attack.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in Baqubah detonated, killing three policemen and wounding one other.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed Colonel Isa Yusuf Sayil, an army officer under Saddam Hussein, while he was at a gas station in northern Baghdad.   Sayil's sister was killed last year by gunmen and his son wounded.  Attacks on members of Hussein's former regime are frequent in Iraq.
A group of masked perpetrators attacked the courthouse building in Tafalla, in Navarre province with incendiary devices.  The attack caused minor damages to the premises.  This was one of three attacks perpetrated on this evening in the region.  Authorities are concerned about an increase in pro-Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) street violence in the month of September.
The main tourist hub of Thailand's South, Hat Yai, fell victim to the growing Muslim insurgency on Saturday night as six bombs exploded across the city in crowded commercial areas. The first bomb detonated around 9pm and the other five quickly followed thereafter, each about five minutes apart. The second explosion occurred in front of a major tourist hotel on Sanehanusorn Road.Foreign tourists were included among the dead and injured. Police believe that the attacks were meant to protest a state-sponsored Peace Project meeting in Yala and to celebrate the anniversary of the founding of the Gerakan Mujahidin Pattani terrorist movement.
The main tourist hub of Thailand's South, Hat Yai, fell victim to the growing Muslim insurgency on Saturday night as six bombs exploded across the city in crowded commercial areas. The first bomb detonated around 9pm and the other five quickly followed thereafter, each  about five minutes apart. The sixth and final explosion of the night occurred in the same pub district -- Thammanoonvithee Road -- as the third explosion.Foreign tourists were included among the dead and injured. Police believe that the attacks were meant to protest a state-sponsored Peace Project meeting in Yala and to celebrate the anniversary of the founding of the Gerakan Mujahidin Pattani terrorist movement.
Four bombs targeting police, a political party, a tribal leader, and a security firm exploded in Kirkuk.  In the third attack, a suicide car bomber detonated his explosives near a police checkpoint, killing himself, but not causing any other injuries.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.  It is unclear if the attacks were coordinated.
Gunmen shot and killed Ahmed Riyadh al-Karbouli, a television journalist for a satellite channel run by the Iraqi Islamic Party.  It was reported that al-Karbouli had received death threats for the past four months warning him to leave the station and to stop his critical reporting on the insurgency.   Attacks on journalists are frequent in Iraq.  Since 9 September, three other journalists and a freelance photographer who worked for Iraqi newspapers have been killed in Iraq.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in Mosul detonated, wounding one policeman.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed two policemen in Taji.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A small explosive charge detonated at an annex of the Bastia courthouse, on the island of Corsica.  The blast caused only minor damages and there were no reported casualties.
Police found eight bodies, all bearing signs of torture and gunshot wounds, dumped in the al-Yarmouk district of western Baghdad.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen attacked police in Mosul, killing four policemen.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.Ansar al-Sunnah claimed responsibility for attacking a police control center in Mosul on this day.  The group stated that six policemen were killed.
Three police officers were killed by a suicide car bomb in Kabul on Kabul-Jalalabad highway on September 18.  Another police officer was injured in the attack along with at least eight civilians.  The blast also damaged a shipping truck and another police vehicle.  There is no information yet on who is responsible for the incident.
President Yusuf of Somalia survived an assassination attempt when six suicide bombers attacked his convoy. The attack left five members of the Presidents entourage dead as well as the six attackers.  Two men have been arrested for the attack but as of yet their affiliation is unknown.  Possible perpetrators include the Union of Islamic Courts, the group that controls the majority of central and south Somalia with the exception of Baidoa, the base for President Yusuf's UN-backed government.  Al-Qaeda was indentified by President Yusuf as the culprit.  Another theory speculates that Ethiopia carried out the attack in order to establish a pretext for a later invasion of Somalia.
Gunmen shot and killed two former members of Saddam Hussein's Baath Party in Najaf.  Attacks on former members of Hussein's regime are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen attacked a former army officer of Saddam Hussein's Baath party, killing him and his wife in Baqubah.  Attacks on former members of the Hussein regime are frequent in Iraq.
The Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade claimed responsibility for firing a rocket on the Israeli settlement of Nativ Ha'asara.  No casualties were reported. Note, while the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade is often linked to Fatah, the relationship between the two groups is not always clear.
Gunmen attacked a policeman in Kut.  His body was later found bearing gunshot wounds and signs of torture.  Attacks against police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen attacked the vehicle of Hameed al-Hilaly, a member of Karbala's governorate, wounding two of his bodyguards and his son.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.
A government official working with the water authority in Kirkuk was killed in an attack by insurgents.  Attacks on local government officials are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen attacked a police patrol in Baqubah, killing three policemen.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Mujahideen Shura Council claimed responsibility for firing on police in Baqubah on this day.
Gunmen attacked a police patrol in Baqubah, killing two policemen.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Mujahideen Shura Council claimed responsibility for firing on police in Baqubah on this day.
An explosive device targeting the convoy of Raad Rasheed al-Timimi, the governor of Diyala province, detonated, killing a policeman and a bodyguard.  The governor was not harmed.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq. Note, the number of injuries was not available.The Mujahideen Shura Council later claimed responsibility for the attack.
The Al-Quds Brigades, the armed wing of Palestine Islamic Jihad (PIJ), claimed responsibility for firing a rocket on Sha'ar Hanegev.  No casualties were reported.The Israeli daily Ha'aretz reported several rocket attacks in Israel on this day.  One rocket hit a classroom of Sapir College, but did not result in any injuries.  Two others caused property damage in another parts of the Negev.
Two bombs detonated in predominately Shiite areas of southern Baghdad.  The second exploded near the Agriculture Ministry office in Zaafaraniyah, wounding eleven people.  The attacks likely had sectarian motivations.  It is unclear if they were coordinated.
Gunmen attacked police in Kirkuk, killing one civilian and wounding two policemen.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
The Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK) claimed responsibility for a truck bomb attack in Igdir, which injured seventeen people.  The blast took place near a police guest house and four of the injured were police officers.  Another four of the injured were professional soccer players, in town for a match.  Igdir lies on the far eastern border with Armenia, and the PKK does not usually perpetrate attacks in this area.
A bomb attached to a motorcycle outside a restaurant in northeast Baghdad exploded, killing one person and wounding six others.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen shot and killed an Iraqi translator who was working with US forces in Samawa.  Attacks on those who work with coalition forces, particularly translators, are frequent in Iraq.
Palestinian militants fired a rocket on Israel.  The device landed on a road in the western Negev, causing damage but no injuries.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in Mosul detonated, killing a civilian.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Two mortars hit the Health Ministry in Baghdad, seriously wounding three people.  Attacks on government buildings are frequent in Iraq. Later the same day a police patrol was attacked in the same area.  It is unclear if the incidents were coordinated.
Militants fired a rocket-propelled grenade (RPG) at the embassy of the United Arab Emirates in Baghdad.  The explosive hit an external concrete block and did not result in casualties.  Attacks on diplomatic targets, particularly embassies representing Arab or Muslim governments, are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb placed underneath a civilian car exploded in eastern Baghdad.  When police arrived at the scene, a second bomb detonated, wounding three policemen.  Insurgents often coordinate follow-up attacks that target emergency personnel and first responders.  Note, the target of the first bomb attack is unclear.
An improvised explosive device went off in a village in the Doda district on September 25.  Two people, a police officer and a civilian, were injured in the blast.  The exact target of the attack is unclear.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives at a new police station in Jurf al-Sakhar, killing himself and two policemen and wounding four others.  Eight US soldiers were slightly injured in the attack.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Two bombs targeting police in eastern Baghdad detonated in quick succession, killing three civilians and wounding twenty-one others, including twelve policemen.  There were also reports of mortar fire.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Police found the bodies of five people, all beheaded, in Suwayra.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen stormed the Sunni al-Ashra al-Mushara mosque in western Baghdad and then attacked Sunni homes in the area.  At least ten people were wounded, including four civilians, a policeman, and five militants.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
Three teachers and one student were injured when a bomb exploded at Khost University on September 26.  No one has claimed responsibility for the attack.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in Baqubah exploded, killing four people (two police and two detainees) and wounding two policemen.  The patrol was transferring detainees at the time of the attack.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded inside the home of a policeman in Numaniyah.  The attack wounded a civilian who was passing by at the time of the incident.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen attacked civilians going to the Mashaada Sunni mosque in the Hurriya district of northwest Baghdad for Ramadan evening prayers.  Ten people were killed and eleven were wounded.  The attack likely had sectarian motives.
An unidentified gunman shot and killed a police constable, Ghulam Mohammad Malik, in Srinagar on September 27.
Suspected members of the Purbo Banglar Communist Party (PBCP) attacked a member of the local government from Daulatpur on September 27.  The government official, Alauddin Hossain Jhantu, was killed when at least 20 suspected PBCP members singled him out at a market in Jhenidah.  The attackers blocked the entrances to the market.  No other casualties were reported.
In the early morning hours on Wednesday, unknown assailants set fire to five schools in three districts across the city of Kamphaeng Phet in southern Thailand. No one was injured or killed, but damage was estimated to total at least 1.6 million Thai Baht. Authorities are uncertain whether the attacks were linked to the ongoing insurgency or to disgruntled supporters of the Prime Minister that was ousted in a recent coup.  The Ban Bueng Looknok school in the Pran Kratai district was the first school that was set ablaze.
Police believe that Muslim militants were responsible for the shooting death of a school janitor riding on a public bus on Wednesday morning in the Mayo district of Pattani.The victim was in route to work and accompanied by about ten other passangers on the bus. The assailants boarded the bus at a stop for a local market. About two kilometers later, the militants shot the man in the head with a 9mm pistol while the bus was stopped. They then fled the scene on foot.
The Al-Battawin police station in central Baghdad was attacked with mortars and a car bomb.  Five people, including a policeman, were killed and another fifteen were wounded.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Islamic State of Iraq, formerly the Mujahideen Shura Council, claimed responsibility for attacking a police station in the al-Radwaniyah area of Baghdad on this day.  The group stated that light and medium caliber weapons were used.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in central Baghdad detonated, wounding three policemen.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb targeting the convoy of Usamah al-Nujayfi, a member of parliament for the Iraqi National List and a former minister, exploded.  No injuries were reported.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.Iraq's Jihadist Leagues claimed responsibility for detonating an explosive that targeted a sport utility vehicle belonging to one of the leaders of the lower council of the [Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq (SCIRI)].  It is unclear if the attack was the same as the attack on al-Nujayfi's convoy.
A car bomb exploded near a restaurant and passing police patrol on Sadoun Street in central Baghdad.  As police and first responders arrived at the scene, a second car bomb exploded.  A total of five people were killed and thirty-four injured.  Police were among the casualties.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.  Insurgents also often target emergency personnel in coordinated follow-on attacks.
A female special police officer was shot and killed by three unidentified gunmen in her home in Kupwara on September 28. In 2004, her husband, who was also a police officer, was similarly killed by gunmen.
Police believe that Muslim militants are responsible for the shooting death of a local man on Thursday. The man was shot in the head shortly after dropping a group of children off at school. Muslim militants in the Thailand's southern provinces have been waging a campaign against the government in which civilians are often murdered at random to create fear and chaos in the local society.
Suspected members of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) shot and killed a police constable and wounded three other police officers in Vavuniya on September 29.
Police found and removed a bomb planted outside a Pepsi factory in Phuentsholing.  Phuentsholing is located in southwest Bhutan. The bomb was found on the same day that police recovered another bomb near an office building.
A car bomb exploded outside the home of a police official in Kirkuk, wounding seventeen civilians.  A car bomb exploded earlier in the day outside the home of another policeman in Kirkuk.  It is unclear if the attacks were coordinated.
Gunmen kidnapped Colonel Adnan Husayn from his home near al-Amarah and later killed him.  Husayn was an army official under Saddam Hussein.  Attacks on members of Hussein's former regime are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded outside of the Interior Ministry building in Kabul on September 30.  The attack killed 12 people and injured 42 others.  The Interior Ministry chief of security and a police officer were among those killed.  The Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack, although the group denied that it was a suicide attack. The group's statement said that it had placed a bomb outside the building instead.  An Interior Ministry spokesperson, however denied this claim, and said that it was a suicide attack and that the police had tried to stop the suicide bomber before he detonated his explosives.
A low-grade bomb exploded outside a traditional market in the religiously divided town of Poso in Indonesia's central Sulawesi province in the early morning hours of September 30th. No major damage or fatalities were reported. The blast was one of two apparently coordinated attacks  -- the second of which occurred at a local church. Police did not specify suspects, but they believe the attacks were expressions of protest and meant to stir social unrest following the execution of three Christian men by firing squad the week before. The men were convicted on the charge of inciting violence against Muslims.
Gunmen shot and killed Safaa al-Obaidi, the director of the main teaching hospital in Najaf, outside his home.  Attacks on professionals are frequent in Iraq, as insurgents attempt to disrupt the country's reconstruction.
The Jaffna offices of the International Committee of the Red Cross were damaged by a grenade explosion on October 1.  No one was injured in the attack.
A police officer was shot and killed by suspected members of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE).  The officer was on his way to work at a police station in the Amparai district.
Militants in Amiriyah, west of Baghdad, set fire to the home of a Shiite member of Parliament.  No one was injured in the attack, however the home was destroyed.  The official blamed the incident on Baathists and other elements of Saddam Hussein's former regime.  The attack may have also had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen shot and killed a policeman in Mosul.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Islamic State of Iraq claimed responsibility for shooting several policemen in Mosul on this day.
Suspected members of the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) threw a grenade at a police patrol near a gathering of worshippers in Dhemaji on October 2.  The worshippers were celebrating the Hindu festival of Durga Puja.  The grenade missed the police patrol and exploded near the worshippers, killing a boy and injuring 20 other people.  The attack occurred after the ULFA pulled out of peace negotiations with the government on September 27.
Two bombs detonated in quick succession in the predominately Shiite al-Karrada district of Baghdad, killing one person and wounding nine others, including three traffic policemen.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
A remote-detonated bomb targeting a police patrol exploded in the al-Qahira neighborhood of Baghdad, killing two civilians and wounding two others.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A Nagaland police constable was shot and killed by gunmen in Kohima on October 3.  The National Socialist Council of Nagaland - Isak-Muivah (NSCN-IM) issued a statement denying responsibility for the attack and blamed instead the National Socialist Council of Nagaland - Khaplang (NSCN-K).
Sriporn Sangkaharat, a police officer and teacher, was shot by militants as she and her son rode on a motorcycle in Than To district.  Both Sriporn and her son were both injured by the gunfire, which was shot from behind their vehicle.  Drive-by shootings are frequent in southern Thailand and are used by Islamic militants to inspire fear among the general population.
At least two explosive devices targeting the convoy of Industry Minister Fawzi al-Hariri detonated in the Camp Sarah district of southern Baghdad.  The blast killed eighteen civilians and three of Hariri's security guards and wounded 89 other people, including eleven security guards and fifteen policemen.  Hariri was not in the convoy at the time, as the vehicles had only left to be refueled.  It was reported that a car bomb exploded fifteen minutes after the attack on the same street, however no additional casualties were reported.  It is unclear if the third bombing was a coordinated attack targeting first responders or just a delayed explosion.  Hariri was the assistant to Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari before being appointed Ministry of Industry in Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki's government.
Gunmen attacked patrons of a caf in Zaafaraniya, a district on the outskirts of southern Baghdad, killing five people and wounding six others.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
A large bomb exploded in Ayub Park in Rawalpindi on October 4.  The park is located near President Musharraf's residence and Army House, which consists of a group of buildings belonging to the Army. The target of the attack is unclear, although a military spokesperson said that the bomb was not targeting the President or Army House.  Other bombs that did not detonate were reportedly also found nearby in the park.
The Al-Nasir Salah al-Din Brigades, the armed wing of the Popular Resistance Committees, launched a Nasir homemade projectile at the Israeli town of Nativ Ha'asara.
The head judge of the primary court in Maydan Wardag Province, Sayed Mohammad Ghani, was kidnapped by unidentified gunmen on October 5.  Ghani was taken from his house in Maydanshar.  His wife and son were injured in the attack.
Gunmen shot and killed a policeman in Fallujah.  A civilian was also killed in the area, however it is unclear if the fatality was caused by the same attack.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
An explosive device detonated among day laborers waiting for work in Baghdad's Tayyaran Square, killing two people and wounding twenty-six others.  This was the fourth bombing in Tayyaran Square this year.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
The al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade fired two Aqsa rockets at Sederot area. The al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade is often associated with Fatah but the relationship is not always clear.
Mayoral candidate Arturo Franco Patino was shot in the leg by two men on a motorcycle.  The shooting occurred during the meeting of the security council.  Patino is a candidate for the Alternative Democratic Pole (PDA).
One police officer was killed when a suicide bomber detonated his explosives at the Khost Security Command headquarters on October 6.  Eight other police officers and 11 civilians were injured by the explosion.  The Taliban issued a statement claiming responsibility for the attack.
The al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades fired two homemade projectiles at the Israeli city of Sederot.  The Brigades said that the shelling comes in response to a series of assassinations.  al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade is often associated with Fatah but the relationship is not always clear.
A police officer was injured when unidentified gunmen opened fire on a group of police officers in Rajouri on October 6.
Gunmen in Sinjar, close to the Syrian border, killed two laborers and wounded two others.  The victims were minority Yezdis and worked for a contractor.  Attacks on contracting firms and their employees are frequent in Iraq, as insurgents try to destabilize the country's reconstruction.  The attack may have also had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen shot and killed a prominent lawyer for the Kurdistan Democratic Party outside his home in Mosul.  Attacks on government officials and their staff are frequent in Iraq.  The attack may have also had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen shot and killed police Colonel Thamir Selman, deputy chief of the Interior Ministry internal affairs office.  His body was found dumped in Baghdad.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Mujahideen Shura Council claimed responsibility for killing an intelligence element of the Interior Ministry in Baghdad on this day.
A police vehicle was attacked by with a grenade in Ramban on October 7.  A police officer was killed in the attack and two others were injured.  The attackers, who remained unidentified, also shot at the vehicle after throwing the grenade.
A police station in Dibrugarh was the target of a grenade attack on October 7.  No one was injured by the explosion.  The police later arrested two people in connection with the attack.
Two roadside bombs targeting a police patrol in northeast Baghdad exploded, wounding six policemen.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Mujahideen Shura Council claimed responsibility for a double bombing targeting police in Baghdad on this day.
Three incendiary devices were planted at the courts in the town of Navarre.  Only two of the devices detonated, causing limited damages and no casualties.  No further information is provided.
A civilian was injured when suspected members of the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) threw a hand grenade at a police station in Sivasagar.  There were no other casualties, although the station was damaged.  The attackers escaped on motorcycles, but  were later arrested.
A polling station in the village of Eni-Kali (Kurchaloi district) was attacked using grenade launchers, with three or four grenades exploding near the building; no injuries or deaths were reported.  The attack comes in advance of early elections to the People's Assembly of Chechnya in a number of villages in the republic.
A Muslim rubber plantation worker was shot and killed by suspected insurgents in Pattani province.  This was one of four shootings in the southern provinces on this day.  Muslims seen as sympathetic to the government are often targeted by insurgents in this region.  Drive-by shootings are also frequent in southern Thailand and are used by Islamic militants to inspire terror among the general population.
Upwards of twenty-five gunmen, each wearing police uniforms, broke into the Baghdad home of Amir al-Hashemi, the brother of Iraq's Sunni Vice President, Tariq al-Hashemi, and killed him.  The perpetrators' uniforms allowed them to surprise Hashemi's guards.  They subsequently entered the home and chased Hashemi onto his roof and then onto a neighbor's roof before shooting him in the head.  They then kidnapped at least seven neighbors who witnessed the attack.  Amir al-Hashemi served as an advisor to the Minister of Defense and had commanded Iraqi ground forces under a previous government.  He is the third sibling of Tariq al-Hashemi to be killed since April.
A car bomb placed in the Shalal market in the predominately Shiite Shaab district of northeast Baghdad exploded, killing thirteen people and wounding forty-six others.  The device detonated just as merchants began to close their stores to break the Ramadan fast.  Attacks on crowded, public areas, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
When a police patrol arrived at the scene of an attack on police in Khalis, a roadside bomb exploded, killing two policemen and wounding one other.  Insurgents often coordinate attacks to target police and first responders.
Gunmen kidnapped at least six worshipers as they left a Sunni mosque in central Baghdad.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
At least thirteen people were wounded when a remote-controlled bomb hit a bus carrying police officers in Kabul on October 10.  The bomb was attached to a bicycle.  At least ten police officers were injured, along with at least three civilians who were riding in a taxi nearby.  The incident occurred during rush hour in the morning.  A Taliban spokesperson issued a statement claiming responsibility on behalf of the group.
Gunmen shot and killed a former member of Saddam Hussein's Baath Party in Diwaniya.  Attacks on members of Hussein's former regime are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed a police captain in Mosul.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Islamic State of Iraq claimed responsibility for killing a police captain identified as Ahmad and another policeman in east Mosul on this day.
A roadside bomb targeting police detonated in Mussayab, killing two policemen.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Four people were injured when an explosive device, hidden inside a bag, detonated in a busy market in Tacurong City, on the island of Mindanao.  Authorities are blaming the attack on Muslim extremists and think that it may have been perpetrated in retaliation for a massive military offensive being launched on the island of Jolo.
Two grenades were thrown at the Indian consulate in Kandahar by two suspected Taliban members on motorcycles.  No one was injured in the explosions.
Gunmen broke into a family's home in the Doura district of Baghdad, killing four people and wounding two others.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen attacked a police station in Diwaniya, killing a policeman.  Ten prisoners were freed during the attack.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.  Note, it is unclear if the objective of the attack was to free prisoners or target police.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in Baghdad killed one policeman and wounded three others.  Three civilians were also injured.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Islamic State of Iraq, formerly the Mujahideen Shura Council, claimed responsibility for detonating a car bomb near two police patrols in the al-Mustansariyah area of Baghdad on this day.  The group stated that six police were killed in the attack.
An explosive device, made of a mortar shell and detonated by mobile phone, exploded outside the South Sea Mall in Cotabato, on Mindanao island.  The blast caused extensive damage to the building and to cars parked nearby, but there were no reported casualties.  Authorities are blaming this attack and two others on Mindanao island on Muslim extremists.  They believe the attacks may be retaliation for a major military offensive aimed at capturing Jamaah Islamiya (JI) members on the island of Jolo.
Gunmen shot and killed Colonel Subhi Muhammad Hasayn al-Mashhadani, a former pilot in the Iraqi Army under Saddam Hussein, and his two sons in Mosul.  Attacks on members of Hussein's former regime are frequent in Iraq.
Minutes after an explosion in the al-Qahira (Cairo) neighborhood of Baghdad, a second device detonated, wounding four people who had gathered at the scene of the first bombing.  Insurgents often coordinate bombings to target first responders.The Islamic State of Iraq, formerly the Mujahideen Shura Council, claimed responsibility for several attacks on police on this day, however the group did not mention a coordinated bombing.
A bomb strapped to a motorcycle detonated as a police patrol passed in Baghdad, killing three people, including a policeman, and wounding five police and ten civilians.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Islamic State of Iraq, formerly the Mujahideen Shura Council, claimed responsibility for detonating an explosive device near a police patrol in central Baghdad on this day.  The group stated that two policemen were killed.  They also claimed several other attacks in the city on this day.
The Martyr Abu Ali Mustafa Brigades, the armed wing of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP), shelled the settlement of Nativ Ha'asara with a 120 millimeter mortar.
A bomb exploded near the civil secretariat office in Quetta on October 12.  No one was injured in the attack.  The explosion occurred on the same evening that a bomb targeted a water pumping station in the same city.
A bomb detonated inside a police station in Hillah, killing the commander of a special police force, his deputy, and six other people.  Ten were wounded in the blast.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A cell phone transmitter tower owned by the Megafon company was shot at using automatic weapons in Karabulak, causing significant damage, but virtually no disruption in service.   This is is one of two attacks on Megafon towers in Karabulak between 12:30 AM and 1:00AM that day and one of nine in all of Ingushetia.
A cell phone transmitter tower owned by the Megafon company was shot at using automatic weapons in the Ordzhonikidzevskaya village, causing significant damage, but virtually no disruption in service.   This is is one of two attacks on Megafon towers in Ordzhonikidzevskaya between 12:30 AM and 1:00AM that day and one of nine in all of Ingushetia.
A cell phone transmitter tower owned by the Megafon company was shot at using automatic weapons in Surhahi, causing significant damage, but virtually no disruption in service.   This is is one of nine attacks on Megafon towers across Ingushetia between 12:30 AM and 1:00AM that day.
Gunmen stormed the home of a Shiite family in Mahmoudiya, killing four people.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
A roadside bomb hit the convoy of the governor of Laghman province on October 14.  The governor escaped the attack unhurt, but an administration official in the convoy was killed when unidentified gunmen opened fire on the vehicles after the bomb exploded.
A low-intensity explosive device detonated at the Poso regent's office, causing no casualties.  Authorities believe this attack may have been perpetrated in order to trigger instability after a week of calm in the region.
Gunmen shot and killed a policeman in Suwayra.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb targeting a convoy of vehicles from a private security firm exploded, wounding two Iraqi civilians.  Attacks on private security firms are frequent in Iraq as they often protect foreign officials and Iraqi leaders.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives near a Facilities Protection Service convoy in Kirkuk, killing five people and wounding ten others.  The Facilities Protection Service guards government institutions and infrastructure.  Attacks on the oil industry are frequent in Iraq.
Mohammad Yunos Hossayni, a member of the Kandahar provincial council was shot and killed by unidentified gunmen on motorcycles on October 15.  Hossayni was leaving his house in Kandahar and was on his way to the office when the attack occurred.  A bodyguard and driver were injured in the incident.  No one has claimed responsibility for the attack.
A bomb placed on a railroad track by suspected members of the Communist Party of India-Maoists (CPI-Maoists) in Giridih exploded, destroying about four meters of railroad track and interrupting train schedules.  No one was injured by the blast.  The attack may be associated with a strike called by the Maoist group called the Revolutionary Democratic Front to protest the arrest of three of its members.
Asanee Sani, who militants accuse of being a police informer, was shot and killed while he shopping at a fresh market in Joh I Rong.  One bystander was also hit by the gunfire and wounded in the shoulder.  Drive-by shootings are frequent in southern Thailand and are used by Islamic militants to inspire fear among the general population.
A roadside bomb targeting the convoy of Mohammad Daeekh, the head of the police crime department, detonated, wounding one of Daeekh's bodyguards.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Insurgents fired rocket-propelled grenades (RPGs) at a security vehicle belonging to the British Consulate in Basra, wounding a foreign security guard.  Attacks on diplomatic targets are frequent in Iraq.
An explosive device targeting a police patrol in central Baghdad detonated, killing one policeman and wounding four others.  An hour later, a second bomb exploded in the same area, wounding three policemen and a civilian.  Insurgents often coordinate attacks that target first responders arriving at the scene of an earlier attack.  The Islamic State of Iraq, formerly the Mujahideen Shura Council, claimed responsibility for several attacks on police in Baghdad on this day, however did not mention the coordinated bombings.
Gunmen stormed the Baghdad home of Amad al-Faroon, the brother of the chief prosecutor trying Saddam Hussein for genocide, and killed him in front of his wife.  Attacks on judges and their families are frequent in Iraq; three weeks ago, the judge's brother-in-law was killed by insurgents as he and his family drove in Baghdad.The Islamic State of Iraq, formerly known as the Mujahideen Shura Council, claimed responsibility for the attack.
Gunmen attacked the home of a Shiite family in Mahmudiyah, killing five people.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
Hasun Yamalae, a village headman, and his co-worker, Euramae Lehmoh, were both shot and killed as they returned from shopping in Raman district.  The killing is being attributed to Islamic separatists.
Suan Maneebutr, a rubber tapper, and his wife, Amnuay Maneebutr, were attacked by unidentified gunmen as they were going home from the rubber plantation  on a motorcycle in Bannang Sata, Yala province.  The wife, Amnuay was killed, while Suan was critically injured.  The perpetrator fired his weapon from a motorcycle alongside the couple.  Drive-by shootings are frequent in southern Thailand and are used by Islamic militants to inspire fear among the general population.
Reverend Irianto, the General Secretary of the Central Sulawesi Christian Protestant Church, was shot and killed by two masked men on Jalan Wolter Monginsidi, in South Palu.  Reverend Irianto was known for his close relationship with Islamic figures in Palu and was involved in the peace process in Poso.  Authorities believe the attack was perpetrated in order to cause unrest in the area.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives near a police patrol in Baghdad, killing himself and two policemen, and wounding five others.  Four civilians were also wounded.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Two suicide bombers detonated their explosives outside the police academy of Kirkuk, killing themselves but causing no other fatalities.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A car bomb exploded at a police checkpoint in Tikrit, killing a police officer and wounding two others.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
The al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades launched two rockets at the settlement of Sederot.  The al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades are often affiliated with al-Fatah, but the association is sometimes unclear.
A police officer, Muhammad Dilawar, was shot at and killed on October 17 by unidentified gunmen while he was at a bus stop in Telbal.
Gunmen shot and killed a former member of Saddam Hussein's Baath Party in Suwayra.  Attacks on members of Hussein's former regime are frequent in Iraq.
A suicide bomber blew himself up in his car in Argun as he was being chased by the police.  The bomber was killed in the blast and was the only casualty. The bomber had been under police surveillance, although it was unclear what the bomber's intended target was.  The police also arrested another person with remote-controlled bombs at the site of the explosion.
A gas pipeline in rural Sabana de Torres in the Santander department of Colombia was attacked with explosives by unknown perpetrators.  The pipeline belonged to the Transoriente company.
Gunmen shot and killed police Colonel Basim Qasim in the Saydiya district of southern Baghdad.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen attacked a police station in the Doura neighborhood of Baghdad, killing four policemen and wounding ten civilians.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb targeting police responding to a bombing in the Doura district of southern Baghdad detonated, killing two policemen and wounding two others.  Insurgents often coordinate attacks to target civilians and first responders who arrive at the scene of an earlier attack.
A suicide bomber blew himself up near a group of border police officers outside of the city of Khost.  One police officer was killed by the blast and four others were injured.
Gunmen kidnapped Hasib Arif al-Ubaydi, a member of the committee that drafted Iraq's constitution, while he was traveling on the Kirkuk-Tikrit highway.  Attacks on government officials and those who work with them are frequent in Iraq.
A government official from the National Security Directorate was killed by a remote-controlled bomb that exploded as he was riding a motorcycle near Khost. The Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack.
A Buddhist man was shot and injured by suspected militants who were riding on a motorcycle.  The attack took place in Narathiwat province.  Drive-by shootings are frequent in southern Thailand and are used by Islamic militants to inspire fear among the general population.
An explosive device made of a gypsum-filled training grenade was thrown at the regional prefecture administrative office in Ajaccio, on the island of Corsica.  The device was thrown from the street and landed in the parking lot, where it exploded against the external wall of the premises.  This was one of two explosive attacks in Ajaccio on this evening.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives while on a public bus in Baghdad, killing himself and four other passengers, and wounding twenty-five.  Attacks on transportation networks are frequent in Iraq, however some media sources speculated that the bomber was on his way to carry out an attack on a different target when his explosives detonated prematurely.
Explosives attached to bicycles detonated in a popular market in Mahmudiyah shortly before mortars were fired on the area.  At least nineteen people were killed in the coordinated attack and upwards of sixty more were wounded.  The bombing occurred just before Muslims were to break their Ramadan fast.  Attacks on crowded, public areas, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A Muslim man was killed and his wife injured when suspected militants fired at them in Pattani province.  No further information is available.  Drive-by shootings are frequent in southern Thailand and are used by Islamic militants to inspire fear among the general population.
Gunmen in the Amil neighborhood of Baghdad shot and killed a barber.  Attacks on barbers are frequent in Iraq, as extremists believe that shaving men's beards or giving western style haircuts violate Islamic law.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives as he traveled down Palestine Street, a major commercial area in eastern Baghdad, killing himself and three others, and wounding twenty.  Some media sources reported that the perpetrator was on his way to one of the city's largest markets.  Attacks on crowded, public areas, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A bomb exploded at the main power plant in Zummar, Sinjar Administrative region (northern Iraq), wounding three people.  Attacks on utilities and energy infrastructure are frequent in Iraq, as insurgents attempt to destabilize the country's reconstruction.
Gunmen shot and killed Major Ra'id Ali Ahmad, a member of the Citizenship Directorate north of Baqubah.  Attacks on local government officials are frequent in Iraq.
Palestinian militants launched Qassam rockets at the Israeli city of Sederot, causing damage to several vehicles.
A policeman was killed in Baiji.  The tactic and weapon used are not known.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Boonya Nadae, a former employee of the Thai government, was shot and killed by motorcycle gunmen while he was returning home from a local market.  The attack took place in Thung Yang Daeng, Pattani province.
A bomb planted near a cable television office in Sopore, Kashmir, exploded on October 24.  While the bombers cleared the building before the explosion, a pedestrian was killed by the blast.  The television office had recently received threats of an attack for airing supposedly obscene programs.
A bomb exploded at night in the backyard of house in the Government Employees' Colony housing complex in Quetta on October 24.  There were no injures.
Sayed Nur Mohammad Agha, a member of the Fariab Province Provincial Council, was shot and killed by unidentified gunmen in Fariab on October 25.  The attackers were riding motorcycles when they shot at Agha.  Agha's bodyguard was injured in the attack.
An explosive device targeting a bus in Balad Ruz detonated, killing six people.  Attacks on transportation networks are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Gunmen attacked a police checkpoint in Diwaniya, wounding two policemen.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Militants detonated explosives at a police station in eastern Samarra.  No casualties were reported as the offices had been evacuated several days before the attack.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed Ibrahim Jasim, a member of the Al-Quyyarah Municipal Council in Mosul.  Attacks on local government officials are frequent in Iraq.
Two people were injured when unidentified gunmen opened fire on a Quetta Express passenger train in Balochistan province.  The train was passing through Mashkaf town when the incident occurred.  Two rockets were also fired at the train, but they missed their target.
The Hamas-affiliated al-Qassam Brigades fired a number of Qassam projectiles at a power station near Ashqelon.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in Fallujah detonated, killing one policeman and wounding three others.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A grenade blast, intended for a General Roads and Engineering Force (GREF) vehicle, killed a woman and injured a child  in Udhampur on October 27.  The woman and child were nearby when the grenade missed its target.
Abdulgafar Udin, a Muslim employee at the air transportation office, was shot at least thirteen times in the chest as he was walking to work in Zamboanga.  Drive-by shootings are frequent in southern Thailand and are used by Islamic militants to inspire fear among the general population.
Gunmen stormed the home of Faliha Ahmed Hassan, the head of a women's rights group in Hawija (near Kirkuk), and killed her.  As the perpetrators fled the scene, they shot and killed a policeman.  Attacks on political activists are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen attacked an electricity power unit in Nasiriyah, killing a Nepalese private security guard.  Attacks on Iraq's energy infrastructure are frequent, as insurgents attempt to disrupt the country's reconstruction.Note, this attack is classified as domestic because the target was the electricity power unit, not the Nepalese guard.
Gunmen shot and killed Maitham Taqi al-Asadi, a translator working for US troops in Diwaniya.  Attacks on those who work with American and coalition forces, particularly translators, are frequent in Iraq.
One person was killed and 13 others were injured after a bomb exploded near a police building and the Inspector General's Office in Quetta.  No one has claimed responsibility for the attack.
A roadside bomb exploded in Batticaloa on October 28 targeting a police Special Task Force truck.  Three officers were injured by the blast.  The bombing occurred three hours after a similar roadside bomb targeted a police patrol in Vavuniya.  The Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) are suspected to be responsible for the attack.
An explosive device detonated near a primary school in Samarra, wounding eight people.  The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
Police found the body of a policeman in Mosul.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Islamic State of Iraq claimed responsibility for killing a policeman in the Sumar district of Mosul on this day.  Ansar al-Sunnah claimed to have ambushed a policeman in the Intisar district.
Gunmen opened fire on a convoy of vehicles carrying Sunni pilgrims to Mecca (Saudi Arabia) while they were traveling near Baqubah, killing at least one person.  Attacks on religious pilgrims are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A police officer was injured when a suspected member of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) threw a hand grenade at a group of police officers at a roadblock in Vavuniya.
Insurgents from the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) launched explosives at the Administrative Deparment of Security (DAS) building in Buenaventura.  The bomb fell on the floor without detonating and only minor damage occurred.  This is the fifth attack of this nature on the DAS building this year.
An explosive device detonated on a street corner in the predominately Shiite neighborhood of Sadr City in Baghdad, killing thirty-one people and wounding at least fifty others.  The victims were mostly day laborers waiting for work.  Iraqi authorities stated that the explosion was caused by a car bomb, however witnesses said that the blast appeared to have been caused by a device hidden in a bag left on the corner.  Attacks on crowded, public areas are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Gunmen opened fire on police in Baqubah, killing two policemen and two civilians.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A suicide bomber wearing a police uniform detonated his explosives at police headquarters in Mosul, killing himself, two policemen, and a three-year-old girl.  Nineteen others, including ten police, were wounded in the bombing.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed Dr. Isam al-Rawi, the head of the Association of University Instructors and a leading member of the Muslim Scholars Association.  Attacks on professionals are frequent in Iraq; this attack also likely had sectarian motivations.
The Salafist Group for Call and Combat (GSPC) launched a double attack on police stations in Algeria.  Terrorist elements first opened fire on a police station in Reghaia before a truck bomb detonated at the stations.  No one was injured in the attack at Reghaia; however, significant damage was done to the building. Three people were killed in the  Dergana attack, a suburb of Algiers.  The Salafist Group for Call and Combat (GSPC), who recently joined the Al-Qaeda movement,  is believed to be responsible.
A Spanish aid worker, Roberto Villa, the mission chief of the NGO Cooperation for Peace Assembly was kidnapped and held for seven hours before his release.
A roadside bomb targeting police killed one policeman and a civilian and wounded two civilians.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed Nasrat Hassan, a policeman, in Samarra.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb detonated in the predominately Shiite district of Sadr City in Baghdad, killing three people and wounding five others.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.Note, one media source reported that the bomb exploded outside a family court; others stated that the explosion occurred outside a popular restaurant.
A suicide car bomber detonated his explosives at a wedding party in Baghdad, killing at least twenty-three people and wounding nineteen others.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
A bomb exploded at a teashop near a major market in the Muang district on Tuesday, in what appears to be another attack by the ongoing Muslim insurgency in Thailand's southernmost provinces. Hidden in an icebox, the bomb weighed 5-kilograms and destroyed the entire building that housed the teashop. There were no deaths, but three customers were severely injured.
Gunmen kidnapped Aqeel Fakhir Khalaf, a teacher at Rasool Intermediate School in Amarah.  Attacks on professionals, particularly teachers, engineers, and doctors, are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb placed in the trunk of a taxi exploded at the Shurjah market in Baghdad, killing two people and wounding ten others.  Attacks on crowded, public areas, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A bomb exploded on board a bus in southwest Baghdad, killing two people and wounding four others.  Attacks on Iraq's transportation networks are frequent and often have sectarian motivations.
A bomb exploded on the Al-Jumhuriyah Bridge in central Baghdad, killing three people and wounding three others.  The device reportedly targeted sport utility vehicles often used by police and private security companies.  It was later discovered, however, that Judge Na'im al-Uqayli, the president of the al-Karkh Criminal Court, was killed in the bombing.  It is unclear if the attack targeted al-Uqayli specifically or the police-like vehicles he was traveling in.  Attacks against police and judges are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen stormed the home of Hamid Naama, a member of the Islamic Party and legal advisor to the Sunni Endowment, killing Naama and his young daughter.  Attacks on government officials and their staff are frequent in Iraq.
A car bomb exploded in a meat market in Mahmoudiya, killing one person and wounding four others.  Attacks on crowded, public areas, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Gunmen shot and killed Tariq Abid Ali, a judge of Baqubah's criminal court, and his son as they left their home.  Attacks on judges are frequent in Iraq, as militants see them as collaborating with the government.
Gunmen shot and killed a preacher at the Sunni Al-Hajah Sabriyah Mosque in Kirkuk.  Attacks on religious officials are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A bomb exploded at the Rautahat District Land Reform Office on November 2.  Madan Krishna Upreti, the chief of the office, was injured in the attack.  The Maoist group, Janatantrik Terai Mukti Morcha (JTMM) claimed responsibility for the incident.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in the Doura neighborhood of Baghdad detonated, wounding three civilians.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed a bodyguard of Sadiq al-Hakim, a Shiite cleric, in the town of Manathira (near Najaf).  Attacks on religious figures and their security staff are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Gunmen shot and killed Ahmed al-Rashid, a correspondent for al-Sharqiya Television, in the predominately Sunni Adamiya neighborhood of Baghdad.  The station reported that al-Rashid was the third employee to be killed since March 2003.
Suspected gunmen from the People's United Liberation Front (PULF) shot and killed Mohammed Amutombi Gogimayum, a member of the Nationalist Congress Party, in Imphal West on November 3.
Insurgents are believed to be responsible for the shooting death of a 50-year-old Muslim on Friday in the Bannang Sata district of Yala. The man was murdered with an assault rifle as he was resting in front of his house after attending prayers at a local mosque.Muslim insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, police, educators, as well as religious and community leaders in their campaign to destabilize society and gain independence from Thailand.
A bomb attached to a motorcycle detonated in a vegetable market in Suwayra, wounding seven people.  Attacks on crowded, public areas, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Three tribal members were shot and killed by unidentified gunmen in North Waziristan.
A bomb targeting a police patrol in Hawija exploded, wounding two policemen and three civilians.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.This was one of only several attacks in Iraq on this day, as several cities around the country were locked down in anticipation of a court verdict against former President Saddam Hussein.
Four Qassam rockets were fired at Sederot from the northern Gaza Strip, with one landing near an outdoor market.
Gunmen attacked a police station in Mahaweel.  Police responded and killed two of the perpetrators.  No police casualties were reported.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq, however, this was one of only several attacks in Iraq on this day, as several cities around the country were locked down after a Baghdad court sentenced former President Saddam Hussein to death.
Five people associated with the International Organization for Migration (IOM), a non-governmental organization, were kidnapped by unidentified gunmen in Zormat on November 6.  Two of the IOM workers are Afghan engineers and the rest are foreigners.  The group was traveling in Zormat to conduct a construction survey for a school when they were kidnapped.  Three of the workers were released on November 7, however the status of the remaining two is unknown.
Gunmen shot and killed a police lieutenant colonel outside his home in Samawa.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Two police officers and two civilians were injured when a hand grenade was thrown at a Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) camp in Srinagar.
Police report that a 47-year-old male Buddhist teacher was murdered on Tuesday by Muslim insurgents as he was driving a motorcycle in broad daylight.Muslim insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, police, educators, as well as religious and community leaders in drive-by shootings. The violence is central to their campaign to destabilize society and gain independence from Thailand. This latest insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Members of the Salafist Group for Call and Combat (GSPC) beheaded an elderly Sheppard in T'kout, which is located 80 km south of Batna. The GSPC targeted the Sheppard because he earlier reported to the police that the GSPC confiscated one of his animals.
Sunni extremists destroyed two Shiite shrines in Hillah.  Attacks on religious shrines are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.  No casualties were reported.
U.S. troops stormed a building in Muqdadiya and found a policeman blindfolded and shackled.  The policeman stated that he and two colleagues had been kidnapped days earlier, but that they had been released after their families paid a ransom.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.  Note, the incident date listed is the date the policeman was found.
A car bomb detonated near the Nida mosque in Adhamiyah, a predominately Sunni area northeast on Baghdad, killing one person and wounding six others.  Attacks on religious institutions are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in Baiji detonated, killing one policeman and wounding three others.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Islamic State of Iraq claimed responsibility for detonating explosives targeting police in Baiji on this day.
Suspected members of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) threw a hand grenade and shot at police officers at a police station in Vavuniya.  One officer was killed and two were injured.
Militants attacked a policeman and his guard in Basra, wounding them both.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A suicide car bomber crashed his vehicle into a group of people at a spare parts market in the Karradah district of downtown Baghdad, killing nine people and wounding twenty-seven others.  Attacks on crowded, public areas, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A bomb placed in the Haraj market in Baghdad's al-Bab al-Sharqi district exploded, killing three people and wounding nineteen others.  Attacks on crowded, public areas, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in central Baghdad detonated, wounding four people.  The attack occurred near a petrol station.  Attacks on police, as well as gas stations, are frequent in Iraq.Ansar al-Sunnah claimed responsibility for two bombings that targeted police in Baghdad on this day.
An office of the Spanish Socialist Workers' Party (PSN-PSOE) was targeted by unidentified assailants in Burlada, in Navarre province.  Between one and three Molotov cocktails were thrown at the offices.  The devices were similar to ones used later in the morning in Estella.  Police believe the two attacks to be connected.
(3 of 8 coordinated bombing attacks)Police report that Islamic militants carried out a near-simultaneous bombing of six car showrooms and two motorcycle showrooms in Yala on Thursday just before noon. The bombs were placed in exhibition vehicles in showrooms throughout the Muang district, including those of Isuzu, Nissan, Ford, and Mazda, and triggered remotely by mobile phone.  Four people were injured in two of the blasts, while nine were injured in the other six.A closed-caption TV in the Ford showroom captured images of two Muslim teenagers coming into the showroom that morning with a bad and leaving shortly thereafter empty-handed.Muslim insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, police, educators, as well as religious and community leaders in drive-by shootings and a bombing campaign. The violence is central to their campaign to destabilize society and gain independence from Thailand. This latest insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
(7 of 8 coordinated bombing attacks)Police report that Islamic militants carried out a near-simultaneous bombing of six car showrooms and two motorcycle showrooms in Yala on Thursday just before noon. The bombs were placed in exhibition vehicles in showrooms throughout the Muang district, including those of Isuzu, Nissan, Ford, and Mazda, and were triggered remotely by mobile phone.Muslim insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, police, educators, as well as religious and community leaders in drive-by shootings and a bombing campaign. The violence is central to their campaign to destabilize society and gain independence from Thailand. This latest insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
An explosive device targeting a police patrol in Baghdad detonated, but did not result in casualties.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Armed men kidnapped a police lieutenant colonel in northern Baghdad.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A police guard was injured when suspected members of the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) threw a grenade at the house of the Nagaon Superintendent of Police.  The superintendent was not injured, however.
A Qassam rocket fired from the Gaza Strip landed in the western Negev.
A bomb exploded outside of the office of a government official in Kharan on November 10.  However, no one was injured by the blast.  The government official was not identified.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives at a police station in Zaghinya, north of Baqubah, killing himself and two other people.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Islamic State of Iraq claimed responsibility for the attack.
Two Thai policemen patrolling on motorcycles near the border with Malaysia in Yala province were shot dead by Islamic insurgents on Saturday. The assailants mutilated the officers'  bodies by smashing their heads with large knives and stole their guns before fleeing the scene.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, police, educators, as well as religious and community leaders in drive-by shootings and bombings. The violence is central to their campaign to destabilize society and gain independence from Thailand. This latest insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A roadside bomb targeting a police convoy wounded police colonel Abbas al-Dulaimi, the head of the US-Iraqi Joint Coordination Center in Tikrit.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
An explosive device detonated near Taiyran Square in Baghdad's Fanarah neighborhood.  Several minutes later, as onlookers and police arrived at the scene, a second device exploded.  Three people were killed, including a policeman, and seven wounded, two police among them.  Coordinated attacks that target police and first responders are frequent in Iraq.Ansar al-Sunnah claimed responsibility for a coordinated attack targeting police in Baghdad on this day.
Two Qassam rockets struck the western Negev, landing in open areas.
A car bomb exploded near the Iranian embassy and the Green Zone, the heavily fortified area of Baghdad that houses the Iraqi government and the US and British embassies, wounding one civilian and damaging nearby vehicles.  The attack may have had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen opened fire on one of Vice President Adel al-Mahdi's bodyguards as he traveled in west Baghdad.  The attack killed the guard and wounded two other people.  Attacks on government officials and members of their staff are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed five employees of Iraq's state-owned oil company in Baghdad.  Attacks on the oil industry and its employees are frequent in Iraq as insurgents attempt to disrupt one of the country's most profitable industries.
Gunmen shot and killed Namis Karim, a Sunni sheikh, as he traveled to a mosque in Baqubah.  Attacks on religious leaders are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Three security guards with a road construction company were kidnapped by unidentified gunmen from the company's headquarters on November 13.
Suspected members of the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) threw a grenade at the home of the Superintendent of Police in Guwahati.  One police officer and two civilians were injured.
Gunmen ambushed a passenger bus near Fakhmaya, a town east of Baghdad near the Iranian border, killing seven people.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
A car bomb exploded in central Tikrit, wounding three policemen and seven civilians.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded in central Baghdad near the Shurja market, killing ten people and wounding twenty-five others.  Attacks on crowded, public areas, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Militants killed three policemen in Kut.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed three officers of the State Buildings Protection force in Ninawa province.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Three rockets landed in Sederot, causing some damage to property, but no injuries.
Suspected members of the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) detonated an improvised explosive device at a crude oil pipeline in Sibsagar owned by the Oil India Limited (OIL) company.  No one was injured by the explosion.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives at a funeral procession in southern Baghdad, killing three people and wounding fifteen others.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
An explosive device targeting the convoy of Abd-al-Rahman Mustafa, the governor of Kirkuk, detonated, however did not cause injury or damage.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.
Four Qassam rockets were launched at an area north of Sederot.  No injuries were reported.
Police report that suspected Islamic militants shot and killed a local government official as he was riding his motorcycle with his 5-year-old daughter. The official's daughter sustained injuries, but was not killed. The official was a Muslim. Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders with drive-by shootings and bomb attacks to destabilize society and achieve independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A roadside bomb detonated near Baghdad's al-Shurjah market, killing one person and wounding three others.  Attacks on crowded, public areas, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Gunmen attacked the convoy of Durayd Kashmulah, the governor of Mosul, killing one of his guards and wounding four others.  Attacks on senior government officials are frequent in Iraq.The Islamic State of Iraq claimed responsibility for firing on the governor's security detail on this day.  The group stated that five guards were killed.
A bomb exploded on a railroad track between Mach and Hirak, disrupting rail transportation.  No one was injured, however.
Gunmen shot and killed Asif al-Khazraji, a Shiite tribal leader, near Ishaqi as he was traveling to his home in Dujail.  Attacks on tribal leaders are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Armed militants shot and killed Omar al-Falahi, a mosque preacher, in Fallujah.  Attacks on religious officials are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.  Insurgents have targeted preachers in Fallujah recently because many have openly called for calm and unity.
A bomb weighing one kilogram exploded in a trashcan at a bus stand in Lahore, injuring at least 20 people.  The incident occurred one day before Pakistan's President Pervez Musharraf planned to visit Lahore.
An explosive device detonated near a passport office in Baghdad, killing one person and wounding three others.  The attack occurred close to the Green Zone, the heavily fortified area of the capital that houses the Iraqi government and the US and British embassies.
Gunmen attacked the home of Rashad Mandan, the former Minister of Science and Technology, in the Zayunah neighborhood of eastern Baghdad.  Reuters reported that militants attacked the home of Ra'id Fahmi, the current Minister, however in a statement to Iraqi media, Fahmi clarified the report.  Reuters originally stated that one guard was killed and another wounded in the shooting, however this could not be confirmed.
Gunmen shot and wounded a traffic policeman in Khalis.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.Note, Iraqi media reported that two civilians were killed on Khalis, however it is unclear if they were killed in the attack on the policeman.
An improvised explosive device (IED) was set off at an oil well outside of Grozny near the community of Podgornoye (Sobachevka), starting a fire at the well.  This attack occurred the same day as another explosion at an oil well in Pobedinskoye, also near Grozny, with another IED being prevented from exploding at another oil well nearby.  Unidentified Chechen rebels claimed responsibility for the attacks on the Tbilisi Chechenpress website.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives at a Kurdish funeral in Kirkuk, killing three people and wounding seventeen others.  The funeral was for a Kurdish man who had been shot the day before.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in eastern Baghdad detonated, killing three civilians and wounding three police.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on a minibus carrying farm workers near the village of Sadiya al-Jabal, east of Baqubah, killing eight people and wounding two others.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
Two reserve police officers were killed when Taliban gunmen opened fire on them in Greshk.
Members of the People's Liberation Army (PLA) attacked a convoy of the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) in Bishnupur, injuring six CRPF officials.  The attackers fled and the PLA later issued a statement claiming responsibility.
Police report that a 53-year-old Buddhist taxi driver was shot dead in a drive-by shooting in Pattani on Sunday. The man was standing near his car at a food market when the assailants drove by on a motorcycle and shot him.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders with drive-by shootings and bomb attacks to destabilize society and achieve independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Gunmen shot and killed a Facilities Protection Service (FPS) police officer and his driver in Baqubah.  The FPS is the special unit tasked with protecting Iraq's infrastructure.  Attacks on the oil industry are frequent in Iraq.
An explosive device detonated outside a Baghdad restaurant frequented by police, killing a civilian and wounding four policemen.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed Fulayeh al-Ghurabi, a Shiite professor at Babil University, in Hillah.  Two other professors were killed in Iraq on this day.  Attacks on professionals, particularly educators, are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed Ahmad al-Tai, the head of clinical science at the faculty of nursing at Mosul University. Two other professors were also killed in Iraq on this day.  Attacks on professionals, particularly educators, are frequent in Iraq.
Police believe that Islamic insurgents are responsible for a bomb that went off on Monday morning at the Sungai Kolok market in Narathiwat -- a busy, crowded market located at a main border crossing with Malaysia.Police believe that the insurgents may have been targeting a military unit known to patrol the area, but the remote detonated bomb killed two civilians and injured over a dozen others.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders with drive-by shootings and bomb attacks to destabilize society and achieve independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Gunmen shot and killed the deputy general manager of the Health Ministry in east Baghdad.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.  This Health Ministry in particular is often targeted as it is closely aligned with Shiite cleric Moqtada al-Sadr.
Gunmen shot and killed a police lieutenant colonel as he drove his private vehicle east of Mosul.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Islamic State of Iraq claimed responsibility for killing a police lieutenant in Mosul on this day.  The group stated that the policeman worked for the Tal Afar precinct.
Police found and defused a bomb that had been placed under an oil pipeline near Basra.  Attacks on oil installations are frequent in Iraq as insurgents attempt to disrupt one of the country's most profitable industries.
A Qassam attack on Sederot resulted in the the injury of a man and a woman.  The man died of his wounds the next day.
An explosive device targeting construction workers in Duluiyah, north of Baghdad, detonated, wounding five.  Attacks on construction workers are frequent in Iraq as insurgents attempt to disrupt the country's reconstruction.
Two roadside bombs targeting police detonated while they attempted to recover the bodies of three people that had been dumped on Haifa Street in central Baghdad.  The explosion wounded two policemen.  Militants often ambush police or family members when they come to retrieve dead bodies.
Gunmen opened fire on a policeman outside his home in Mosul, killing him.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.Ansar al-Sunnah claimed responsibility for shooting a policeman in west Mosul on this day.
A US military patrol found the bodies of eleven people, ten men and a child, all bearing gunshot wounds.  The bodies were dumped west of Haqlaniyah and a van destroyed by fire was found nearby.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
A power pylon was blown up outside of Barkhan, disrupting power supply to the area and to the Kohlu district.  However, no one was injured.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in the Bayaa district of southwestern Baghdad detonated, wounding four police commandos.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Islamic State of Iraq claimed responsibility for bombing several police patrols in Baghdad on this day.
Gunmen kidnapped Dr. Zayd al-Ani from his clinic in the Jumhuriyah neighborhood of Fallujah.  Attacks on professionals, particularly doctors, are frequent in Iraq as insurgents attempt to disrupt the country's reconstruction.
Gunmen shot and killed two policemen in Kut.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A suicide car bomber drove his vehicle into a police checkpoint near the Syrian border, killing himself and two policemen.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on a police checkpoint in Iskandariyah, killing a civilian and wounding a policeman.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Police report that a 40-year-old teacher at the Ban Don Rak school in the Nong Chik district of Pattani was gunned down by Islamic insurgents in a drive-by shooting on Thursday. This incident along with the killing of a school principal the following day has prompted the government to step up security for teachers in the area.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders with drive-by shootings and bomb attacks to destabilize society and achieve independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Gunmen opened fire on the provincial government center in Baqubah, however no injuries were reported.  Attacks on government targets are frequent in Iraq.
Militants attacked a Sunni mosque in the Amil neighborhood of Baghdad, killing two guards.  The attack came a day after five car bombs detonated in a Shiite district of Baghdad, killing 215 people.
Militants attacked a Sunni mosque in Baghdad.  The attack came a day after five car bombs detonated in a Shiite district of Baghdad, killing 215 people.
Five incendiary devices where thrown at the office of the government of the subdelegate in Vitoria, in Alava province.  Three of the devices hit the office, causing minor damages, one hit a lamppost and one landed on the ground.  Fliers found at the scene of the attack read, as repression is not the way.
Gunmen opened fire on police in Mosul, killing one and wounding another.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Islamic State of Iraq claimed shooting several police officers in east Mosul on this day.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in Kirkuk detonated, wounding four policemen.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Police report that four men and one woman were severely injured on Friday afternoon in a bomb attack carried out by Islamic insurgents. The bomb went off at a grocery store in the Yaha district of Yala city around 2pm. The bomb was hidden under a stall near the front of the shop at the opening of a lane that leads to a Buddhist temple. Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders with drive-by shootings and bomb attacks to destabilize society and achieve independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Gunmen opened fire on Amir Shakir, a local council official, killing him and wounding three other people.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen attacked a police checkpoint near Dujail, north of Baghdad, and kidnapped eight policemen.  A policeman wounded in the attack was able to escape.  When a police patrol arrived at the scene they were ambushed by the armed men.  A policeman was killed and another wounded in the follow-on attack.  Militants often coordinate attacks to target police and first responders.
Four locals who worked at a U.S. base were kidnapped by Taliban members on November 25 as they left work.  The Taliban declared that the workers were spying for the United States and killed them the next day.
Police report that a man and woman were murdered in a drive-by shooting on Sunday while riding their motorcycle to the rubber plantation where they worked. The attack against the couple occurred in the Khok Pho district of Pattani and Islamic militants are believed to be responsible.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders with drive-by shootings and bomb attacks to destabilize society and achieve independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Gunmen opened fire on a crowded street in central Baghdad, killing six people and wounding three others.  Attacks on crowded, public areas are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Gunmen opened fire on a police checkpoint in Baghdad, killing one policeman and wounding four others.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Islamic Army in Iraq claimed responsibility for firing on a police in the Yarmouk neighborhood of Baghdad on this day.
Two Qassam rockets were fired from northern Gaza into the western Negev.  No casualties or damage were reported.  The attack was claimed by the Popular Resistance Committees.
A suicide bomber approached the convoy of Governor Abdul Rahman Mustafa as it traveled through Kirkuk, and detonated his explosives after attempting to enter the vehicle, killing himself and a civilian and wounding seventeen others.  The governor was not harmed in the explosion.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.
A police officer was killed when a suicide car bomber crashed his vehicle into a police car in Herat.  The blast killed the bomber and injured three civilians.  The police officer was chasing the bomber when the attack occurred, suggesting that the police may not have been the bomber's intended target.
Police report that a Buddhist villager was gunned down by Islamic insurgents in a drive-by shooting on Tuesday. The shooting left the man dead. It was one of several similar incidents that occurred on Tuesday in Yala.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders with drive-by shootings and bomb attacks to destabilize society and achieve independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Gunmen stormed the Office of Pensions in west Baghdad, killing four guards.  Attacks on government buildings are frequent in Iraq.
Militants attacked a police checkpoint in Duluiyah, north of Baghdad, killing two policemen and wounding two others.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Police fired on a man driving a vehicle packed with explosives as he approached a police checkpoint in Mosul.  The gunfire detonated the bombs, killing the driver and one other civilian and wounding twenty others.  It is unclear if the man planned on targeting the checkpoint or if it was meant to be a suicide attack.
Armed men stormed the al-Qalaa police station in Samarra at the same time as a suicide bomber drove his vehicle into the building.  Police attempted to interrupt the attack by shooting the driver, however he was able to detonate his explosives, killing himself and four policemen and wounding four other police.
Five police officers were injured when suspected members of the Communist Party of India-Maoist (CPI-Maoist) shot at a police patrol party in Purulia on November 29.
Militants kidnapped fourteen laborers from a farm northwest of Mosul.  Their bodies were found the next day.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen shot and killed Shukur Hasan, the head of the local council, outside his home in the Dubz district of Kirkuk.  Attacks on local government officials are frequent in Iraq.
Police report that Islamic militants killed a 40-year-old worker from the government's Southern Border Provinces Peace-Building Command (SBPPC) and his 29-year-old colleague in a drive-by shooting on Thursday in the Yaha district of Yala city.The victims were attacked by a four men in a pick-up truck while riding a motorcycle home from the Yaha SBPPC district office.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target government officials, civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders with drive-by shootings and bomb attacks to destabilize society and achieve independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Police report that a Buddhist shop owner died from wounds suffered when Islamic militants opened fire on his grocery store in Narathiwat on Thursday. After the man was dead, militants detonated a bomb hidden near the shop that critically injured two others. Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders with drive-by shootings and bomb attacks to destabilize society and achieve independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Gunmen armed with rocket-propelled grenades (RPGs) attacked the Sunni Al-Quds mosque in west Baghdad.  The grenades started a fire inside the building, however no casualties were reported.  The perpetrators fled the scene after neighbors opened fire on them.  Attacks on mosques are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A police convoy driving near Gudermes was shot at by unknown persons, injuring two officers from Khabarovsk who had come to Chechnya to supplement police forces in the republic.
Police report that Islamic militants set fire to a train station owned by the State Railway Authority of Thailand in the Ban Salobukeh village in Narathiwat.  The attack occurred in the early morning hours on Friday at nearly the same time as a similar arson attack at a nearby school. Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders with drive-by shootings and bomb attacks to destabilize society and achieve independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Gunmen shot and killed police Captain Hayder Mousa in the new Baghdad area of the capital.  Attacks on police are frequent.
Three car bombs detonated simultaneously in a market in the predominately Shiite al-Sadriyah district of Baghdad, killing sixty-eight people and wounding 121 others.  The attack occurred as people were shopping for food before a curfew went into effect at 5pm.  Some news agencies reported that one of the car bombs targeted an army patrol.  Attacks on crowded, public areas, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
An improvised explosive device (IED) planted in a milk can along the side of the road in Bokaro exploded as two police vehicles passed by.  Fourteen police officers were killed and three others injured by the blast.  The emplacers of the device are suspected to have Maoist connections.
Police report that a 55-year-old village chief and his 10-year-old son were injured in a drive-by shooting on Saturday in the Rangae district of Narathiwat. The man and his son survived the attack because the village chief shot back at the two gunmen. The assailants fled the scene after one of them sustained an injury to the stomach. The gunmen rode together on a motorcycle and they were carrying an AK47 assault rifle. Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders with drive-by shootings and bomb attacks to destabilize society and achieve independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
The body of Abd-al-Karim al-Ubaydi, a member of the National Accord Movement, was found bearing signs of torture in Baghdad.  Attacks on government officials and members of political parties are frequent in Iraq.  Note, the date of al-Ubaydi's death was not reported.
A suicide bomber, suspected to be from Uzbekistan, blew himself up after he was approached by police officers at a checkpoint in Bannu.  One police officer was killed and another was injured by the blast.
Police report that a 59-year-old man died on Sunday after being shot in the head by Islamic militants in a drive-by shooting in the Panare district of Pattani. The assailants doused the victim's body with gasoline but they were unable to set him on fire before fleeing the scene as neighbors began to scream for help.  Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders with drive-by shootings and bomb attacks to destabilize society and achieve independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Gunmen shot and killed Nabil Ibrahim al-Dulaim, a news editor at a private radio station that broadcasts news and educational programming, as he traveled to work in Baghdad.  Attacks on journalists and media assistants are frequent in Iraq.  Reporters Without Borders, an advocacy group, stated that al-Dulaim was the 93rd journalist killed in Iraq since the American invasion in 2003.
Police report that a worker at a rubber plantation was killed in a drive-by shooting around 6am on Monday morning. The shooting occurred while the victim was working at the plantation in the Si Sakhon district of Narathiwat.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders with drive-by shootings and bomb attacks to destabilize society and achieve independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Gunmen opened fire on a minibus in Khalis, killing three people.  The vehicle was carrying laborers.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
Armed militants ambushed a minibus carrying employees of the Shiite Endowment, an organization that cares for Shiite mosques, when they detonated a car bomb as the vehicle passed in Baghdad.  The gunmen then opened fire on the employees, killing fifteen and wounding seven.  Attacks on religious institutions and their staff are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Gunmen shot and killed Ahmad al-Falah, the deputy chief of the Iraqi Islamic Party's office in al-Karkh al-Shamali, as he left his home in the Amiriyah area of Baghdad.  Attacks on those who work for or with the government are frequent in Iraq.
A section of railroad track was blown up in Karbi Anglong on December 5.  The attack disrupted railroad transportation communications, although it missed an incoming train by minutes.
Gunmen opened fire on the vehicle of Brigadier Muhssin Qassim al-Yassiri, the head of security at the Ministry of Education, as he traveled in west Baghdad.  The attack killed al-Yassiri's driver.  Note, media reports of the attack varied significantly: one stated that al-Yassiri was not harmed, another reported that he was injured, and a third stated that he was killed.
Gunmen shot and killed an Iraqi army general who served under Saddam Hussein.  Attacks on members of Hussein's former regime are frequent in Iraq.
The District Chief of Barmal, Mohammad Mubeen, was shot at by suspected Taliban gunmen in Paktika.  No one was injured, however.
A grenade was thrown at a police station in Gool on December 6.  There were no injuries, however.
A car bomb parked near a gas station in the Karrada district of Baghdad exploded, killing one person and wounding two others.  Attacks on gas stations and the oil industry are frequent in Iraq.
A car bomb targeting police in Fallujah killed two policeman and wounded a third.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Islamic State of Iraq claimed responsibility for the attack.
Palestinians fired a Qassam rocket from the northern Gaza strip toward Israel.  No injuries or damage were reported.
Police report that Islamic insurgents set fire to the Kuruchon Phattana School in Yala city Thursday evening destroying classrooms used by almost 500 students. The school principal told police that the attack occurred around 7pm when the security guards took a break to attend prayers at the local mosque.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders with drive-by shootings and bomb attacks to destabilize society and achieve independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Gunmen opened fire on police in Hawija, west of Kirkuk, killing one policeman and wounding another.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A gas pipeline was blown up in Balochistan on December 8, damaging two feet of the pipeline and disrupting gas supplies to Mastung and the surrounding area.  No injuries were reported.
A suicide car bomber detonated his explosives outside the Shiite al-Abbas shrine in Karbala, killing himself and five other people and wounding forty-four others.  The attack did not damage the building, however cars parked along a nearby street were damaged by the blast.  The shrine houses the remains of Imam al-Abbas, a Shiite leader and the son of the founder of Shiite Islam.  Karbala is considered by Shiites to be the second holiest city in Iraq after Najaf.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.The governor of Karbala, Aqil al-Khaz'ali, stated in an interview that authorities captured a suspect in the bombing.
Militants killed two policemen in Mosul.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Islamic State of Iraq claimed responsibility for opening fire on police in west Mosul on this day.  Ansar al-Sunnah also claimed an attack on police on this day.
A car bomb targeting Diyala governor Ra'id Mulla Jawad exploded in northern Baqubah, however did not result in casualties.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.
A suicide car bomber drove his vehicle into a parking lot for fuel trucks, killing himself and setting four trucks on fire.  Attacks on oil targets are frequent in Iraq as militants attempt to disrupt one of the country's most profitable industries.Note, Iraqi media reported that the attack took place near a border crossing.
A bomb exploded in the People's Democratic Party (PDP) secretariat, killing one police officer.  The incident occurred 24 hours after the gubernatorial primaries held in Asaba which is located Nigeria's  Delta State.
Police report that a 23-year-old man and his 22-year-old brother were murdered on Sunday in a drive-by shooting in the Than To district of Yala city. The two young men were riding a motorcycle to the market to sell sheets of latex when they were attacked by Islamic militants.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders with drive-by shootings and bomb attacks to destabilize society and achieve independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
The Associated Press reported that two policemen were shot and killed outside of Baghdad.  It is unclear if the incidents were separate.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Islamic Army in Iraq claimed responsibility for attacking a police post in al-Sayidiyah, south of Baghdad, on this day.  The group stated that two police were killed and two wounded.
Gunmen kidnapped five teachers as they traveled to the Bani-Tamim elementary school in eastern Dujail.  Attacks on schools and teachers are frequent in Iraq, as militants attempt to disrupt the country's reconstruction.
(2 of 2 coordinated arson attacks)Police report that Islamic insurgents were responsible for an arson attack against the Laham Mitham school in the San Buri district of Pattani in the early morning hours on Monday. Local residents quickly noticed the fire and managed to extinguish it before extensive damage was done. This attack is believed to be linked to another arson attack against a school that occurred in the same district on the same night. Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders with drive-by shootings and bomb attacks to destabilize society and achieve independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A suicide bomber blew himself up in the office of the governor of Helmand, killing eight people and injuring eight others. The Taliban claimed responsibility and indicated that the governor, who was in his office but unharmed, was the bomber's intended target.  Those killed by the explosion included that head of Washir District, five police officers, and two civilians.
Five people were injured when four bombs exploded at an Awami League political rally in Dhaka on December 12.  In another incident, the police found and defused eight additional bombs in a nearby area where further Awami League events were scheduled.
A suicide car bomber detonated his explosives at a police checkpoint in Radwaniya, southern Baghdad, killing himself and another person and wounding eight.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Islamic State of Iraq claimed responsibility for the attack.
Police report that an Islamic insurgent shot a male teacher on Tuesday morning as the victim was in route to school in the Chana district of Songkhla. The victim was rushed to the hospital. His condition is unknown. Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders with drive-by shootings and bomb attacks to destabilize society and achieve independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in Kirkuk killed one policeman and wounded three others.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen kidnapped an advisor to the Ministry of Transportation in Baghdad.  Attacks on government officials and their staff are frequent in Iraq.
Police report that Islamic insurgents shot and killed a 55-year-old man in a drive-by shooting in Yala city as he rode his motorcycle to work on Wednesday morning.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders with drive-by shootings and bomb attacks to destabilize society and achieve independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
(3 of 3 coordinated bombings at a market)Police report that Islamic insurgents carried out a series of three bomb attacks at a market in the Rangae district of Narathiwat on Wednesday morning. The third bomb went off at a motorcycle repair shop located inside the market. Only one person, a 65-year-old woman, was reportedly injured.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A roadside bomb targeting a joint Interior Ministry-police patrol in Samarra detonated, killing two commandoes and wounding one policeman.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A Qassam rocket fired from the Gaza Strip struck the western Negev, damaging property in a local kibbutz.
Gunmen shot and killed Muhsin al-Kanan, a Shiite tribal sheikh and member of the Basra provisional council, along with two of his guards.  Al-Kanan also worked closely with British troops in the region.  Attacks on tribal sheikhs are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.  Many are also targeted for collaborating with the government or coalition forces.
An explosive device targeting police in Kirkuk detonated, wounding two policemen.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on a police checkpoint in Baqubah, killing two policemen.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.Ansar al-Sunnah claimed responsibility for killing a policeman in Diyala province on this day.
Police report that a 46-year-old former village leader was murdered by Islamic insurgents in a drive-by shooting on Friday in the Sungai Padi district of Narathiwat. The victim was riding his motorcycle when the assailants attacked him. Police found the victim's body on the side of the road with multiple gunshot wounds.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Police found the dead bodies of a young couple in an abandoned car in Narathiwat on Friday. The victims had been shot in what appears to have been a drive-by shooting committed by Islamic insurgents.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Police report that Islamic militants attacked the home of a Muslim village leader late Saturday night in Pattani. The village chief and his neighbor were both wounded by the gunfire. Police arrived quickly to the scene where they engaged the militants in a 15-minute gunfight. Two of the militants, both in their thirties, were killed in the exchange.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Gunmen ambushed four Sunni members of the Adhamiya municipal council in east Baghdad.  The militants kidnapped three of the officials and killed the fourth.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq, however this incident may have also had sectarian motivations.
Police found the bodies of four Sunni tribal leaders who had recently met with an Iraqi battalion commander to discuss security.  Attacks on tribal leaders, specifically those who collaborate with the government, are frequent in Iraq.
A car bomb detonated in Mahmudiyah near a bus station and a crowded market, killing one person and wounding two others.  Attacks on crowded, public areas are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A sniper shot and killed a guard at the University of Technology in Baghdad.  Attacks on educational institutions are frequent in Iraq.On 4 December Ansar al-Sunnah issued a video calling on Sunni students and professors to suspend all academic activities at Baghdad universities.  The video denounced killings by death squads and asked those of all sects to abide by the decision.  There is no indication that the group was involved in this attack, however.
Gunmen shot and killed a police commissioner in Kirkuk.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A car bomb detonated at a vegetable market in the Doura neighborhood of Baghdad, wounding seven people.  Attacks on crowded, public areas, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A car bomb exploded along the perimeter wall of a residential compound used by Italian Oil Company Agip.  The blast caused damage but no injuries were reported.  The attack was claimed by the  Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta (MEND).MEND also launched a coordinated attack that also struck the Royal Dutch Shell Compound.
A Qassam rocket landed in a kibbutz in southern Israel.  No injuries were reported.
(1 of 13 coordinated arson attacks)Police report that Islamic militants set fire to 13 public schools throughout the Khok Po and Yarang district of Pattani on Monday night. Most of the buildings were undamaged as local villagers were able to extinguish the fires at 11 of the 13 schools.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
(7 of 13 coordinated arson attacks)Police report that Islamic militants set fire to 13 public schools throughout the Khok Po and Yarang districts of Pattani on Monday night. Most of the buildings were undamaged as local villagers were able to extinguish the fires at 11 of the 13 schools.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
(11 of 13 coordinated arson attacks)Police report that Islamic militants set fire to 13 public schools throughout the Khok Po and Yarang districts of Pattani on Monday night. Most of the buildings were undamaged as local villagers were able to extinguish the fires at 11 of the 13 schools.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in Baghdad's Yarmouk district detonated, wounding four civilians and damaging several vehicles.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen kidnapped Dr. Omar al-Jubouri from the al-Alwiyah maternal hospital in central Baghdad.  Attacks on medical professionals are frequent in Iraq, as militants attempt to disrupt the country's reconstruction.
Police report that Islamic militants set fire to the Baan Tupa primary school in the Kokphoe district of Pattani around 3am on Tuesday. Firefighters tried to extinguish the flames, but were unable to do so before it destroyed the interior of the building. No casualties were reported.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A series of seven incendiary bomb attacks took place in Athens and Thessaloniki, targeting bank branches.  All seven attacks took place within a two-hour time period and police believe they were in response to a statement by Public Order Minister Viron Polidhoras, which called on the anti-establishment community to stop playing with fire.  The first attack took place a little after midnight in the Ilion area, and targeted an Egnatia Bank.  The perpetrators broke the glass of the bank with a rock and threw the explosive device into the building.
A series of seven incendiary bomb attacks took place in Athens and Thessaloniki, targeting bank branches.  All seven attacks took place within a two-hour time period and police believe they were in response to a statement by Public Order Minister Viron Polidhoras, which called on the anti-establishment community to stop playing with fire.  The fifth blast took place at about 1:39am on Kifisias Avenue and targeted an Aspis Bank.  The device was made of a small gas canister, like the others.
Gunmen shot and killed Isma'il Husayn Ahmad, the preacher at Umar al-Faruq mosque in Iskandariyah and a member of the Association of Muslims Scholars.  Attacks on religious officials are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Gunmen opened fire on civilians inside a bus station reportedly popular with students, killing one person and wounding seven others.  Attacks on transportation systems as well attacks on schools and their students are frequent in Iraq.
Palestinians launched a Qassam rocket from northern Gaza at Israel.  The rocket landed in an open area near a kibbutz.
Police report that Islamic insurgents shot and killed a 33-year-old man in Narathiwat on Wednesday. The man was formerly a village defense volunteer. Militants set his body on fire before fleeing the scene and placed road spikes on the road  to prevent police from accessing the scene of the crime.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A Qassam rocket was fired from the Gaza Strip, landing outside Sederot.  No injuries were reported.
A roadside bomb targeting the convoy of police Colonel Adnan Mohammed wounded two policemen in Kirkuk.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed a police intelligence officer in west Baghdad.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Militants killed a member of Saddam Hussein's former Baath Party in Karbala.  Attacks on members of Hussein's former regime are frequent in Iraq.
Palestinians fired a Qassam rocket from the Gaza Strip toward the Sufa crossing.  No casualties or damage were reported.
Suspected members of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) hijacked a Jordanian ship off the coast of Sri Lanka.  The ship, which has a crew of 25 people and was transporting rice, was owned by the International Al Salam Company for Trade and Transport.  The crew was released by the LTTE the next day.
Suspected members of the National Democratic Front of Bodoland (NDFB) kidnapped a junior engineer with the government Border Roads Organization (BRO) in Udalguri on December 22.  The engineer was identified as M. Ganeshan.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in Baghdad wounded two policemen and four civilians.  The attack occurred near the National Theater in the Karradah district of the capital.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb was found and defused by the police outside of the home of the governor of Laghman Province.  No one was injured.
Gunmen shot and killed a former member of Saddam Hussein's Baath party in Diwaniya.  Attacks on former members of Hussein's regime are frequent in Iraq.
Gas supply to Dera Bugti and the surrounding area was disrupted after a bomb exploded part of a gas pipeline.  No injuries were reported, however.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives at a police station in Muqdadiya, killing himself and seven policemen, and wounding upwards of thirty other people.  The blast also destroyed much of the building.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen kidnapped Mohammed Qassim Mahmoud, a doctor who works at the Health Ministry, as he drove in east Baghdad.  Attacks on professionals, particularly doctors, are frequent in Iraq, as militants attempt to disrupt the country's reconstruction.  The attack may have also had sectarian motivations, as the Health Ministry is closely linked with Shiite cleric Moqtada al-Sadr.  Gunmen also kidnapped a doctor in central Baghdad on this day.
A Qassam rocket fired from the Gaza Strip landed in an industrial area of Ashqelon and hit a strategic facility.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives at a police checkpoint near the main entrance to Anbar University in Ramadi, killing himself and three policemen, and wounding two students.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.  Attacks on educational institutions are also common, as militants attempt to disrupt the country's reconstruction.The Islamic State of Iraq claimed responsibility for the attack.
Gunmen attacked a police checkpoint in southern Baghdad.  Casualties were reported, however specific numbers for this attack were not given.
Militants kidnapped Sheikh Taha Yasin Rajab al-Ani, the imam of the Al-Samarra'i mosque, from his home in Baghdad.  His body was found two weeks later showing signs of torture.  Attacks on religious figures are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Gunmen shot and killed a policeman in Kut.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen kidnapped Muhanad Ahmed Saleh, a government official and director of the Baghdad International Fair.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded outside the Abu Hanifa mosque in Baghdad, killing seventeen people and wounding thirty-five others.  The attack occurred in a busy square where merchants were selling food and clothing and did not damage the shrine.  The mosque is considered the most holy Sunni shrine in Baghdad.  Attacks on religious institutions are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Gunmen shot and killed Major General Imad Muhsen Jaafar, the director general at the Interior Ministry.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in Mosul wounded four civilians.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol wounded three policemen and two civilians in the Camp Sara neighborhood of east Baghdad.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A Qassam rocket was fired into the western Negev, causing no damage or injuries.
A hand grenade was thrown at a police patrol in Veppamkulam by suspected members of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE).  No injures were reported, however.
Gunmen shot and killed a police captain and wounded two other police in Baqubah.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Islamic State of Iraq claimed responsibility for several armed attacks on police in Baqubah on this day.
Palestinians launched two Qassam rockets toward Sederot, causing no injuries or damage.  Palestine Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility for the attack.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives at the Kurdistan Democratic Party's offices in Mosul, killing two people and wounding nineteen others.  Attacks on political parties are frequent in Iraq.The Islamic State of Iraq claimed responsibility for the attack, stating that the building was completely destroyed and that [no] less than twenty-five senior officials and officers were killed.
An explosive device targeting police in west Baghdad killed two civilians and wounded four others.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Molotov cocktails were thrown at a building that houses offices of the General Workers' Union (UGT) and the Spanish Socialist Workers' Party (PSOE), in the town of Estella, in Navarre province.  The attack caused slight damages to the premises.
A Qassam rocket landed near the western Negev community of Sederot, causing no injuries or damage.
Gunmen shot and killed two employees of a state petroleum company in Mosul.  Attacks on the oil installations and their employees are frequent in Iraq, as militants attempt to disrupt one of the country's most profitable industries.
A large van bomb detonated in a parking garage at the Madrid Airport, killing two people and injuring twenty-six others.  A caller representing the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) warned of the device prior to its detonation.  The two men killed were both Ecuadorian immigrants who were sleeping in vehicles in the garage.  This is ETA's most deadly bombing since May 2003.  On 9 January 2007, ETA claimed responsibility for the attack, but stated that it did not end their permanent ceasefire, which was declared in March 2006.  The Spanish government has refused to return to negotiations with the ETA political wing in the wake of this bombing.
A car bomb exploded in a fish market in Kufa crowded with people shopping for the Eid al-Adha holiday, killing thirty-four people and wounding thirty-eight others.  After the attack, an angry mob attacked and killed a man suspected of parking the vehicle.  Attacks on crowded, public areas, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.The attack occurred on the day that former Iraqi President Saddam Hussein was executed for his involvement in the 1982 massacre of 148 Shiite men and boys in Dujail.
A car bomb exploded outside a Sunni mosque in the Adhamiya district of northern Baghdad, killing two people and wounding eight others.  Attacks on religious institutions are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations. The attack occurred on the day that former Iraqi President Saddam Hussein was executed for his involvement in the 1982 massacre of 148 Shiite men and boys in Dujail.
Militants kidnapped Sheikh Hamid Mohammed al-Suhail, a tribal leader.  Three days after his abduction, al-Suhail's body was found in Baghdad wrapped in a blanket and bearing signs of torture.  His family reported that the kidnappers had demanded a ransom that they could not pay.  Kidnappings carried out for ransom are common in Iraq, however Al-Suhail was more than likely targeted because he had spoken out against sectarian violence and had recently attended a reconciliation conference in Cairo.
(3 of 8 coordinated bombing attacks)Police report that three people were killed and 30 others injured in a series of bomb attacks across Bangkok on New Years Eve. Nine foreigners were among the injured. A series of six blasts occurred between 5:30pm and 7:00 pm and then an additional two blasts occurred just before midnight. The third explosion, apparently caused by a hand grenade, occurred near the traffic police post at the Saphan Khwai intersection. Two people were reportedly injured by the third blast.Thailand's Prime Minister ruled out the possibility that Islamic insurgents in the South were responsible for the attacks, citing instead supporters of the former Prime Minister Thaskin who was ousted by a military coup in October.
(7 of 8 coordinated bombing attacks)Police report that three people were killed and 30 others injured in a series of bomb attacks across Bangkok on New Years Eve. Nine foreigners were among the injured. A series of six blasts occurred between 5:30pm and 7:00 pm and then an additional two blasts occurred just before midnight. The seventh explosion occurred near midnight when a bomb exploded in a telephone booth directly across from the Central World plaza. Six foreigners and one Thai person were injured in the seventh blast of the night. Thailand's Prime Minister ruled out the possibility that Islamic insurgents in the South were responsible for the attacks, citing instead supporters of the former Prime Minister Thaskin who was ousted by a military coup in October.
Power supply was disrupted in Dera Bugti when a bomb exploded at two electricity pylons.  No injuries were reported, however.
Gunmen shot and killed Ibrahim Abdullah, the coach of Iraq's wheelchair basketball team, in west Baghdad.  Attacks on public figures such as athletes and coaches are frequent in Iraq.
Unidentified gunmen kidnapped Peruvian AFP photographer Jaime Razuri in central Gaza, forcing the journalist from his car and driving him to an unknown location.  The kidnapping occurred near the Ni'mah Building, where the AFP office is located.
The president of the Meitei National Front, Chingsubam Akaba, was shot and killed by unidentified gunmen outside of his house in Imphal East.  Akaba was also the creator of the recently revived Manipur Peoples Party (MPP).  No one has claimed responsibility for the attack.
Palestinians fired a rocket toward Ashqelon, but it fell short and landed near the Israeli border.  No injuries or damage was reported.
Police report that a well-known local Muslim leader was murdered by Islamic insurgents in a drive-by shooting in Narathiwat late Tuesday. The 55-year-old Muslim leader was attacked on a religious holiday as he left a cemetery where he had been praying. The victim had taken a strong public stance against Islamic extremism. Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Gunmen kidnapped the manager of the electricity directorate in Samarra from his home.  Attacks on Iraq's energy infrastructure are frequent, as militants attempt to disrupt the country's reconstruction.
Police report that two Muslim men were shot dead by Islamic insurgents around mid-day on Wednesday in Yala province. The incident conforms to a common pattern of drive-by shootings committed by Islamic gunmen on motorcycles.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Militants fired several mortars on the US consulate in Hillah.  No damage or casualties were reported.
Gunmen shot and killed Brigadier Muzahim Yunus Husayn, the head of Ninawa province's petrol department.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq, however militants often target the country's energy infrastructure to disrupt profitable industries.
Police report that Islamic insurgents set fire to a building housing a children's development center and a Tambon-level government office in Pattani on Thursday afternoon. The fire destroyed the entire one-story building. No causalities have been reported as of yet. Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Gunmen shot and killed a former member of Saddam Hussein's Baath party and his son in Iskandariyah.  Attacks on members of Hussein's former regime are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed the driver of the Minister of Agriculture in the Doura district of southern Baghdad.  Attacks on government officials and their staff are frequent in Iraq.
A rocket fired by Palestinians from the Gaza Strip fell harmlessly near a kibbutz in the Sha'ar Hanegev Regional Council area.  Palestine Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility for the attack.
Gunmen shot and killed a policeman in Diwaniya.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed a former member of Saddam Hussein's Baath party in Kifl, a small town south of Baghdad.  Attacks on members of Hussein's former regime are frequent in Iraq.
A female suicide bomber blew herself up on a bus that was traveling near Ambalangoda in southern Sri Lanka.  The blast killed 15 people and injured 40 others.  The bus, which was carrying 60 passengers, was traveling between Colombo and Matara.  Government officials blamed the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), although the LTTE issued a statement denying its involvement in the attack.  The incident occurred one day after a similar attack on a bus near Colombo.
Eight polling officials were killed and eight others injured when an improvised explosive device exploded on a polling party traveling in Assam at the end of an election day for the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council.  After the explosion, the party was attacked by gunmen suspected to be from the Karbi Longri National Liberation Front (KLNLF).
An explosive device targeting a police patrol in eastern Baghdad wounded three policemen and a civilian.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Afaz Uddin, a member of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP) and Abu Daud, a member of the Jamaat-e-Islami party, were killed in Kushtia on January 6.  Members of the Janajuddha faction of the Purbo Banglar Communist Party (PBCP) are suspected of carrying out the attack, however their involvement remains uncertain.
Suspected gunmen from the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) opened fire at on-duty police officers at a camp for internally displaced persons in Poonthottam.  One police officer was injured in the attack.
Gunmen opened fire on guards at the Ministry of Finance, killing one and wounding two others.  Attacks on government targets are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed a Shiite cleric and his son as they went to a shrine in Mahaweel.  Attacks on religious officials are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A suicide car bomber detonated his explosives at a police checkpoint in Ramadi, killing himself and two policemen, and wounding three other police.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in Baghdad killed a policeman and wounded one policeman and one civilian.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb targeting pilgrims returning to Iraq from Saudi Arabia exploded south of Baghdad, wounding three people.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen shot and killed Hatim Ghadban, a former member of Saddam Hussein's Baath party, in Amarah.  Attacks on members of Hussein's former regime are frequent in Iraq.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives among a group of people outside a police station in Tal Afar, killing himself and four civilians and wounding ten others.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.Note, some media sources reported that the attack took place at a market.
Gunmen shot and killed two workers fixing a water pipe south of Baghdad.  The pipeline had been attacked by militants just a month earlier.  Attacks on utility targets are frequent in Iraq, as militants attempt to disrupt the country's reconstruction.Note, some reports stated that a bomb detonated at the pipeline and that water to Sadr City, a predominately Shiite area of the Baghdad, was affected.
Police report that a teacher was murdered by Islamic insurgents on route to school on Wednesday morning in Pattani province. The victim taught at the Toh Balae School in the Kapho district of Pattani. She was shot in the forehead by insurgents while riding in a pick-up truck with two other teachers. Police believe that insurgents may have targeted her specifically, as she is the niece of a well-known exiled Muslim leader. Another passenger also suffered injuries to his neck. Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A group calling itself the Revolutionary Action of Liberation claimed responsibility for an improvised gas canister explosive device that was placed outside New Democracy (ND) Party offices in Athens.  The blast caused damages to the office and to cars parked nearby, but there were no reported casualties.  The same group claimed responsibility on another attack on this evening against a traffic camera in the city.
Gunmen opened fire on a vehicle carrying five off-duty policemen in east Baghdad, killing them.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Suspected gunmen from the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) opened fire on a police post in Vavuniya on January 11.  One police officer was killed and another injured in the attack.
Gunmen shot and killed Khudr Younis al-Obaidi, a journalist for the al-Diwan newspaper, as he walked in Mosul.  Attacks on journalists and media assistants are frequent in Iraq.
A suicide bomber blew himself up in a minivan as a vehicle reportedly carrying a group of foreign nationals passed by.  The attack occurred in Logar outside of Kabul.  Two foreign nationals were injured, one of them possibly an American.  A local national was also injured.
Gunmen opened fire on a group of engineers and construction workers in Kirkuk, killing two and wounding three others.  Attacks on those who participate in development projects are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen kidnapped and later killed a driver and a guard for the state-run Al-Sabah newspaper.  Several sources reported that the two men were brothers. Attacks on journalists and media assistants are frequent in Iraq.
Police report that Islamic militants gunned down a police officer in Sai Buru district of Pattani on Saturday in a drive-by shooting. The body of the 47-year-old police sergeant was found along the side of a road. He had been shot in the head with a .38-calibre handgun as he commuted from his home to the police station.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A roadside bomb targeting police in Baghdad killed a civilian and wounded six others.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Islamic Army in Iraq claimed responsibility for targeting police with explosives in the al-Jihad district of the capital on this day.  The group stated that everyone in the police vehicle was killed.
Gunmen shot and killed a former lieutenant colonel under Saddam Hussein in Mosul.  Attacks on former members of Hussein's regime are frequent in Iraq.
Four people were reported killed and five others injured when a bomb exploded at the house of a prayer leader in an Afghan refugee camp in Nowshera on January 14.  The prayer leader, Maulvi Masoodullah, was arrested after the attack although it is unclear who is responsible for the bombing.  Masoodullah's brother was among those who died, along with house guests.  Nowshera is located in the North West Frontier Province (NWFP).
Police report that Islamic militants shot and killed a Buddhist man and his wife in an orchard in the Muang district of Yala on Sunday. Both victims were shot in the head and the male victim was beheaded. The scene of the killings was littered with notes signed by the Pattani warriors that threatened further reprisal against all Buddhists. The text of the notes read as follows: we will kill all of you in retaliation for murder in Yupo, and as long as you don't leave our country of Pattani, we will kill all of you crazy Buddhists. Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Gunmen shot and killed a garbage contractor who worked with US troops in Kut.  Attacks on those who work with coalition forces are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed an off-duty policeman in Mosul.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in Baghdad killed three policemen and wounded two others.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A grenade exploded in the Srinagar home of Mirwaiz Umar Farooq, the chairman of the All Parties Hurriyat Conference (APHC).  The Save Kashmir Movement claimed responsibility for the attack.  No one was injured, however.  The APHC is an alliance representing various Kashmiri separatist groups.
Police report that Islamic insurgents launched a bomb attack against a railway near the Ban Bothong Village in the Rangae district of Narathiwat around 9:30 on Monday morning. A section of the railway was damaged, but no casualties were reported. Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Police and eyewitnesses report that a small bomb exploded at the Bahan Post Office near downtown Yangon on Monday in the early afternoon, seriously injuring one postal worker. The post office sustained little damage, but the explosion caused panic in the building and surrounding area.On Thursday, the Vigorous Burmese Student Warriors -- an exiled activist group committed to the overthrow of the military junta that rules Burma -- issued a statement taking responsibility for the post office attack and warning of more attacks in the future. The group also claimed to have sent parcel bombs to the Chinese embassy and the headquarters of the Union Solidarity Development Association -- a political organization linked to the junta.
Two explosive devices were planted near a telecommunications center in southeast Baghdad.  Police were in the process of defusing one of the bombs when the other exploded, killing two police and two civilians and wounding three police and seven civilians.  It is unclear if the attack targeted the telecommunications center, or if the bombs were placed to attract the police.  Attacks on both telecommunications installations and police are frequent in Iraq.
Shortly after a bomb exploded in a Baghdad motorcycle market, a suicide bomber detonated his explosives among police and first responders who had arrived at the scene of the attack.  A total of thirteen people, including three police, were killed and at least seventy wounded.  Militants often coordinate bombings to target police and first responders after an earlier attack.Note, casualties are for both attacks.
A homemade explosive device, with an alarm clock and wires, was found outside the home of Antonangelo Casula, a junior economy minister.  The device was left at the home in Carbonia, on the island of Sardinia.  This was one of two similar attacks targeting government officials that took place on this day.
A group of unidentified attackers set fire to a vehicle belonging to a private security firm, in Thessalonika.  This was one of four arson attacks in Greece on this day.
Police report that Islamic insurgents set fire to a building owned by the tambon administration organization in Pasay Yawo, the local administrative unit of the government, in the early morning hours on Tuesday in Pattani. The building was not occupied and thus there were no causalities. Firefighters were able to extinguish the flames before they spread and thereby the scope of the damage was limited.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Gunmen kidnapped Mohannad Ammanoiel, the head of the Mansour municipality, from the Hamra neighborhood of west Baghdad.  Four of Ammanoiel's guards were killed in the attack.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.
A suicide car bomber was shot and killed by police as he attempted to ram his vehicle into a checkpoint outside a Kirkuk police station, however his explosives detonated, killing eight additional people and wounding forty-three others.  Four policemen were killed and another four were injured.  The blast resulted in the collapse of part of the police station, which caused the majority of the casualties.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded on a gas pipeline near Hub, although gas supply was not disrupted.  The explosion occurred along the part of the pipeline in the Public Health Engineering Colony.  No injuries were reported.
Police report that Islamic insurgents set fire to a public school in the Waeng district of Narathiwat in the early morning hours on Wednesday. The fire caused extensive damage to two buildings at the Ban Kayaeng School -- a conference room and a number of documents were completely destroyed. The insurgents ignited tires and hemp sacks to carry out the arson attack against the school. Over 50 schools in Narathiwat have been struck by arsonists in the last three years since the insurgency broke out. Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Police report that Islamic insurgents detonated a bomb in front of a local religious school on Wednesday just before noon in the Joh I Rong district of Narathiwat. Two soldiers who were guarding the school, known as an Islammiyah, suffered serious injuries from the blast. No civilian casualties were reported.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Police report that Islamic insurgents shot a Buddhist villager in front of his home in the Kabang district of Yala on Wednesday. The 53-year-old worker at a rubber plantation was seriously injured in the latest of a recent string of drive-by shootings that target ordinary citizens.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in Samarra wounded three policemen.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A car bomb exploded in a commercial district of Baghdad, killing four people and wounding ten others.  Attacks on crowded, public areas are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Gunmen opened fire on police in east Baghdad, killing one policeman and wounding another.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Islamic State of Iraq claimed responsibility for shooting police commandoes on al-Qanat Road in east Baghdad on this day.
Kama district chief, Mohammad Ali, was injured when a bomb exploded on his vehicle in Nangarhar on January 18.  Suspected Taliban gunmen also opened fire on the vehicle.  Ali's driver was also injured.
A letter bomb, sent by suspected animal rights activists, was sent to an office of Cellmark, a DNA testing company, in Abingdon.  One woman was injured in the hand when she was opening the letter.  Authorities found the name Barry Horne written on the envelope.  Horne was an animal rights activist who was convicted of firebombing and later died in 2001.  A second similar device was found later this afternoon in Culham.
Police report that Jose Loreno, a prominent grassroots political organizer and anti-communist activist, was shot and killed as he stood in front of his store in the town of Daraga near Legapspi late Thursday. The three assassins who attacked Loreno are believed to be associated with the New People's Army (NPA), the armed wing of the Communist Party of the Philippines that has engaged in a Maoist insurgency for nearly 40 years. Loreno was once a member of the NPA, but he left the group and became a major radio personality and leader of the Movement Against Communism.
Gunmen shot and killed an official from the Ministry of Tourism and Archaeology Affairs outside his home in western Baghdad.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed Safaa Farhan, a pharmacist, in Baiji.  Attacks on pharmacists and medical professionals are frequent in Iraq, as militants attempt to disrupt the country's reconstruction.
Turkish-American jounalist Hrant Dink was assassinated in Istanbul by unknown gunmen.
Gunmen shot and killed Saad Husain al Shibani, an official at the Diyala police directorate, as he walked in a market in Muqdadiya.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed Muhammad Nuri, a staff member at Ninawa Television, as he left his home in Mosul.  Attacks on journalists and media assistants are frequent in Iraq.The Islamic State of Iraq claimed responsibility for killing the TV and radio director's assistant and chief engineer of the radio in Mosul on this day.
Two people were injured when a grenade was thrown at a market in Diphu on January 20.
A member of the local Congress party, Bogadhar Moran, was killed at home in Digboi by suspected members of the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA).  The attack occurred after the ULFA had issued a warning to kill Congress party members if the ULFA was targeted by the police.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in the Zayuna area of eastern Baghdad killed one police commando.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Militants kidnapped an employee of the Sunni Waqf (religious endowment) Office and five others in the al-Mada'in area of southern Baghdad.  The religious official was killed after being tortured and mutilated.  Attacks on religious figures are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A bomb exploded at a railroad station in Bongaigaon on January 21.  At least three people were injured in the attack that was carried out by suspected members of the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA).  Attacks attributed to the ULFA have been frequent in the last month.
Suspected members of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) kidnapped a police officer, Nelson Hevavitharana, in Nelumkulama on January 21.  The officer was shot and killed by the kidnappers.
Police report that a former volunteer for the border defense militia force was shot in a drive-by shooting carried out by Islamic insurgents on Sunday in the Rangae district of Narathiwat. The 34-year-old victim, the brother of a well-known police officer in the community, was critically injured when he was shot at point blank range by two assailants on a motorcycle. The victim was in route to his home from a rubber plantation at the time of the attack. Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A bomb targeting police in Mosul wounded one policeman.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Islamic State of Iraq claimed responsibility for several bomb attacks against police in Mosul on this day.
Gunmen shot and killed an oil technician in Mosul.  Attacks on the oil installations are frequent in Iraq, as militants attempt to disrupt one of the country's most profitable industries.
The police found and removed two bombs from a shrine in Dhaka on January 22.  The police also removed other bomb making material and reportedly suspect that the devices were part for a plan to bomb a service at the shrine on January 30.
Gunmen shot and killed Riyadh Hussein al-Ogaidat, the leader of the Ogaidat tribe, outside his home in Baghdad.  Attacks on tribal leaders are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Two bombs and other bomb making materials were found by the police near the Bara Aulia shrine in Dhaka.  The assembled bombs were described as powerful time devices.  No injuries were reported.
Suspected members of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) shot and killed a manager from the Vavuniya Central Transport Board in Vavuniya on January 22.
Police report that a bomb planted by Islamic insurgents went off near the entrance of a restaurant in the Muang district of Narathiwat around dinnertime on Monday evening. The large bomb was hidden in a flower pot. It caused a blast that injured at least six people during the restaurant's busiest hour of the day. Police indicate that the bomb was detonated remotely by mobile phone. Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A bomb exploded near a gas station in central Baghdad, killing one person and wounding three others.  Attacks on gas stations are frequent in Iraq, as militants attempt to disrupt one of the country's most profitable industries.  Gas stations are also commonly targeted because they have long lines of patrons waiting to buy fuel.
A suicide car bomber detonated his explosives outside the Kurdistan Youth Federation, an affiliate of the Kurdish Democratic Party, in Mosul, killing himself and wounding nine others.  Attacks on government buildings are frequent in Iraq.  This incident may have also had sectarian motivations.
A bomb targeting a police patrol in the Al-Arbajiyah area of Mosul exploded.  Gunmen then opened fire on the police, killing one and wounding two others.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Islamic State of Iraq claimed responsibility for several bomb attacks on police in Mosul on this day.
A bomb planted by suspected members of the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) exploded in a market place in Bongaigaon on January 23.  No injuries were reported, however.  Attacks by the ULFA have been frequent in recent weeks.
A bomb hidden in a bag attached to a bicycle exploded in a market in Bongaigaon, injuring at least six people.
A bomb exploded outside the police headquarters in Kirkuk, wounding thirteen people.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A large group of assailants, numbering near 40, attacked the al-Wahah tourist resort near Gaza, destroying it with explosives.  No one was injured.  The group claimed to be members of the al-Qaeda Organization in Palestine.
Police report that three Muslim teenagers in Yala were seriously injured in a shooting late Tuesday night when a group of insurgents broke into their home and opened fire as they were watching television. Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Gunmen ambushed the convoy of Abd Ziyab al-Ojeily, the Minister of Higher Education, as it traveled in south Baghdad.  Militants reportedly hid in the bushes along the highway and opened fire as the Minister's vehicle passed, killing one of al-Ojeily's personal guards and wounding another.  Al-Ojeily was not harmed in the incident.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq, however the Education Ministry is often specifically targeted, as militants attempt to disrupt the country's reconstruction.Note, the Islamic State of Iraq claimed responsibility for attacking a convoy of an official of the traitor government in Baghdad on this day, however the group stated that the ambush took place in the northern Azim district of the capital.  The claim did not name the official.
Sayed Rahman, the chief of Pachir wa Agam District, was injured when a roadside bomb exploded near his vehicle as he traveled in Nangarhar on January 25.  The driver of the vehicle was also injured.  The group Hizbul-i-Islami issued a statement claiming responsibility for the incident
Gunmen shot and killed Ali Husayn Abd-al-Aziz Ahmad, a council member from the Al-Qayyara district in Mosul, while he was in the village of Sultan Abdallah.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.
Two bombs detonated in the Ishrin commercial district in the al-Bayya neighborhood of Baghdad, killing three people and wounding eleven others.  Attacks on crowded, public areas, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
The police checkpoint between the villages of Chiri-Yurt and Duba-Yurt was shot at using automatic weapons and grenade launchers.  Three police officers on a temporary assignment from the Vologda Region were injured in the attack, which was perpetrated from 150-200 meters away from the direction of the Argun river.
Palestinians fired two Qassam rockets from the northern Gaza Strip toward Sha'ar Hanegev.  There were no reports of injuries or damage.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives outside of a United States aid group office building for the Alternate Livelihoods Program in Lashkar Gah.  The explosion killed the bomber and injured a police officer.  The police had shot at the bomber as he tried to enter the office building.  The Taliban issued a statement claiming responsibility for the incident, although the statement said that the attack had killed U.S. soldiers.
Gunmen opened fire on a police official south of Baghdad, killing a woman in a passing vehicle.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Islamic Army in Iraq claimed responsibility for opening fire on a police official in civilian clothing in the Salman Pak area of southern Baghdad on this day.
A roadside bomb exploded outside a mosque in the al-Bayya neighborhood of Baghdad, wounding two people.  Attacks on religious shrines are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Suspected members of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) opened fire on a bus traveling from Mannar to Colombo on January 26.  One person was killed and two were injured in the attack.
Police report that Islamic insurgents murdered a police sergeant in a drive-by shooting late Friday night in Pattani. The sergeant was on a routine patrol when the insurgents attacked him.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Two individuals attacked a SPV (Secretariat for Safety and Roads) office with grenades, only one of which detonated.  This is the first incident in  memory of an attacke on a public building in the Yucatan.  The incident occurred less than 24 hours after governor Patricio Patron Laviada declared that authorities are justified in using violence to protect citizens.
Armed men attacked the al-Shakur mosque, burning part of the structure and destroying a minaret.  Attacks on religious shrines are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A car bomb exploded outside of a car dealership in Kirkuk, killing six people and wounding nineteen others.  Attacks on crowded areas are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Gunmen shot and killed the son of a former member of Saddam Hussein's Baath party in Amara.  Attacks on former members of Hussein's regime are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb exploded near the al-Nedaa mosque in northern Baghdad, killing one person and wounding nine others.  The explosion occurred on a street that is often crowded with day laborers looking for work.  Attacks on religious shrines as well as crowded, public areas are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A car bomb exploded outside a popular restaurant in Kirkuk, killing five people and wounding fifteen others.  Attacks on crowded, public areas are frequent in Iraq.
A car bomb exploded in Kirkuk's Shorja market, killing five civilians and wounding twenty others.  Attacks on crowded, public areas, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
An explosive device detonated at a restaurant in Cervione, on the island of Corsica, almost completely destroying the premises.  Authorities are describing the bomb as very powerful.  This was one of two explosive attacks on the island on this night.
Police report that a bomb exploded on the roof of a house near the intersection of a street leading to the Islamic college of the Prince Songkla University in the Yarang district of Pattani on Sunday morning. The explosion occurred only 15 minutes after a caravan carrying the Thai Interior Minister and visiting Ministers of Islamic Affairs from three Arab countries had passed the entrance to the street. The Prime Minister of Thailand had visited the troubled region the day before the attack.Three border policemen on patrol were slightly injured by the blast. The 4-kilogram bomb was detonated by mobile phone. Police found a note near the scene of the incident that threatened further attacks against anyone who harbored police or soldiers in his home.
Police report that Islamic insurgents shot and killed a Buddhist civilian in a drive-by shooting late Sunday in Pattani. The victim was a 46-year-old male.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A car bomb exploded near a procession of Shiites marking the Ashura holiday in the Zafaraniyah neighborhood of Baghdad.  Casualties were reported, however specific numbers were not given.  The attack likely had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen shot and killed a policeman outside his home in the Mualimeen neighborhood of Fallujah.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Islamic State of Iraq claimed responsibility for raiding four homes of police officers in Fallujah on this night.
A bomb exploded at a busy intersection popular with day laborers in east Baghdad, killing one person and wounding two others.  Attacks on crowded, public areas are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A young suicide bomber blew himself up after being stopped and searched by police officers in Dera Ismail Khan on January 29.  A police officer and a civilian were killed by the explosion and seven people, including two other police officers, were injured.  The bomber's intended target is unclear.
Police report that an Islamic insurgent gunned down a member of the Karubi sub-district council in a drive-by shooting in the Kapor district of Pattani on Monday morning. The victim was struck by two bullets as he drove his wife to school in a pick-up truck. The assailant fled the scene on a motorcycle. The victim later died at the hospital, though his wife escaped unharmed.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Police report that the body of an unidentified male teenager was discovered around two in the morning on Monday along the side of a road in the Muang district of Yala. The victim's throat had been slashed and his body was littered with multiple stab wounds. Police believe that Islamic insurgents are responsible for the attack.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A remote control bomb was placed in a civilian's car in Zemmouri, Algeria.  The device was remotely detonated several minutes after the vehicle departed.  The blast slightly wounded the driver, who is believed to have targeted as a result of being a former security agent. No one has claimed responsibility for the attack but the Salafist Group for Call and Combat (GSPC), now known as the al-Qaeda Organization in the Islamic Maghreb, has been active in this area.
Authorities found and defused two bombs that had been placed on the main highway north of Karbala.  The devices likely targeted Shiite pilgrims and other officials who were to arrive in the city to commemorate the Ashura holiday.  The attack probably had sectarian motivations and was one of several bombings targeting Shiite processions around the country.
A bomb was thrown at traffic police in an intersection in Gazipur on January 30.  The explosion killed one police officer and injured two others.  A member of Amatol Mujahedin Bangladesh was arrested in connection with the attack.
Gunmen shot and killed a police commander and two of his guards as they protected pilgrims commemorating the Ashura holiday in Aziziyah, south of Baghdad.  The attack was one of several targeting Shiite processions around the country.
A small, homemade explosive device, made of a small pipe filled with an incendiary, was discovered outside the offices of the General Intelligence (RG) agency in Corte, on the island of Corsica.  The targeted building also houses the town's prosecution officer.
Police report that Islamic insurgents opened fire on a civilian couple in a drive-by shooting in the Khok Pho district of Pattani on Wednesday. The male victim died at the scene from his wounds, while his wife was rushed to the hospital for treatment. Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A police checkpoint in Barmal was attacked by suspected members of the Taliban on January 31.  Three police officers were killed and two were injured in the attack.
A roadside bomb targeting police near Suwayra injured three policemen.  The officers were responding to reports of a car bomb in a Sunni village when they were attacked.  Four suspects were detained.  Militants often coordinate attacks to target police and first responders.
A car bomb detonated in a crowded area of New Baghdad's Amin district, a predominately Shiite area, killing two people and wounding ten others.  Witnesses reported that a man parked the vehicle outside a currency exchange and then left, telling people nearby that he would return shortly.  After twenty minutes, they became alarmed and called the police, afraid that the vehicle was booby-trapped.  The explosives detonated, however, before the police could arrive.  Iraqi media reported that the device was remote-controlled.  Attacks on crowded, public areas are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Unidentified gunmen opened fire at a foot patrol of security forces in Senapati on January 31.  One civilian was killed and two were injured in the attack.
Police report that Islamic insurgents planted a bomb that exploded behind a roadside food stall on Wednesday around noon in the Muang district of Yala. The blast injured six civilians including the 62-year-old owner of the food stall and his 65-year-old wife. Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Gunmen shot and killed two policemen in Diwaniya.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Five gunmen stormed the Physical Education College of Diyala in Baqubah, seized the son of the college's dean, Walhan Hamed al-Rubaie, took him to his father's office, and then shot them both.  Attacks on educators are frequent in Iraq, as militants attempt to disrupt the country's reconstruction.
Suspected gunmen from the United Liberation front of Assam (ULFA) shot and killed a member of Congress, Abdul Bashar, in Golaghat on February 1.  Bashar was traveling to Kacharipam when the attack occurred.
Armed bandits ambushed a police patrol in the southeastern Iranian city of Zahedan.  The police were patrolling the streets in a police vehicle when armed men in two cars surrounded the vehicle and shot the officers.
The body of Abdul Ghafoor, an Afghan national, was found in North Waziristan on February 2. A note on the body said that Ghafoor was killed in retaliation for spying for the United States.  Attacks of this nature have occurred frequently in the region, despite a recent peace agreement declaring that violence against alleged spies would not occur.
Suspected gunmen from the People's Liberation Army (PLA) opened fire on a Border Security Force (BSF) patrol at a local playground in Thoubal on February 2. One BSF officer was killed and two were injured in the attack.
An attack by members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) left 64 municipalities without power.  The insurgents toppled two electricity pylons.  Power was partially restored two hours after the incident, which occurred at 9pm.
A dump truck full of explosives detonated in a crowded Baghdad market, killing at least 137 people and wounding upwards of 305 others.  A suicide bomber drove the vehicle into the market telling bystanders that he was delivering food to shops in the area.  The vehicle was reportedly loaded with landmines, ammunition, rockets and mortars in order to inflict maximum casualties.  Attacks on crowded, public areas, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.  The Sadriya market has been targeted in the past: in December 2006 over fifty people were killed and in June four were killed in bombings.  The attack was the deadliest single bombing in Iraq since the American invasion in 2003.  (A coordinated attack on Sadr City in November 2006 killed 215 people, however five car bombs were detonated in this incident).
A suicide car bomber crashed his vehicle into a police station in Amriyat al-Fallujah, south of Fallujah, killing himself and wounding eight policemen.  The attack occurred as militants fired mortars at another police station in the same area.
Two car bombs detonated outside a pastry shop in Kirkuk, wounding four people.  This was one of eight bombings in Kirkuk on this day.  The Islamic State of Iraq claimed responsibility for six of the attacks, claiming that the operation, called karama, or dignity, was meant to eradicate the Americans and their followers.  The attacks may have also been perpetrated in response to calls by Kurdish lawmakers to fully annex the city.
A car bomb exploded outside of a girls' school in Kirkuk, wounding two people.  This was one of eight bombings in the city on this day.  The Islamic State of Iraq claimed responsibility for six of the attacks, claiming that the operation, called karama, or dignity, was meant to eradicate the Americans and their followers.  The attacks may have also been perpetrated in response to calls by Kurdish lawmakers to fully annex the city.
Militants detonated explosives at a fire department in Baqubah.  Attacks on government targets are frequent in Iraq.  The Ministry of Education was also bombed in the same area on this day.
A grenade exploded in a man's hand as he tried to throw it at a court complex building in Anantnag on February 4.  The man died and seven people were injured by the explosion.
Suspected members of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) threw a hand grenade at a police post in Vavuniya on February 4.  One civilian was injured in the attack.
A bomb attached to a motorcycle detonated outside a market in Kanan, east of Baqubah, wounding five people.  Attacks on crowded, public areas, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A car bomb detonated near the al Sumoud gas factory in the Doura district of southern Baghdad, killing two people and wounding seven others.  Attacks on Iraq's infrastructure are frequent, as militants attempt to disrupt the country's reconstruction.
Gunmen opened fire on police in Samawa, killing one policeman and wounding another.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A car bomb detonated at a gas station in Baghdad, killing four people and wounding ten others.  This was one of two bombings at gas stations in the capital on this day.  Attacks on the oil industry in general and gas stations in particular are frequent in Iraq, as militants attempt to disrupt one of the country's most profitable industries.  Attacks on fuel stations are also common as they attract long lines of patrons.
A car bomb exploded in a popular market in the Amil district of Baghdad, wounding one person.  Attacks on public areas, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A roadside bomb targeting a vehicle carrying Layth al Uthman, the deputy governor of Ninawa province, wounded Uthman and three of his guards as they traveled in the al Zira'ah neighborhood of Mosul.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.The Islamic State of Iraq claimed responsibility for the attack.
A member of the Paktia Province singers' union was shot and killed by unidentified gunmen in Zarmali on February 5.  The identities of the attackers are unclear, but the singer had been warned in the past to stop singing and making music.  Some extremists believe that music violates Islamic law.
A car bomb exploded near al Ulwiyyah Maternity Hospital in central Baghdad, killing four people and wounding fourteen others.  Attacks on hospitals and health professionals are frequent in Iraq, as militants attempt to disrupt the country's reconstruction.
Two banks, the National Bank of Greece and Egnatia Bank were targeted by an explosive device left in an arcade in the Peristeri neighborhood of Athens.  The device was made of a gas canister and explosives.  These types of attacks are usually the work of anarchists and have increased since two suspected anarchists are on a hunger strike in Korydallos Prison.
Police report that a convoy carrying seven district officials narrowly escaped injury when a roadside bomb exploded in the Bacho district of Narathiwat early Monday morning. Police believe that the bomb was planted by Islamic insurgents.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Police officers and Airport Security Force (ASF) officers fired at a man attempting to throw a grenade in the VIP lounge area of the Islamabad airport on February 6.  The man died when the grenade he was carrying exploded. It is unclear whether the man intentionally blew himself up after being stopped or if he dropped the grenade by accident.  Three officers were injured in the incident.
Armed militants kidnapped four policemen from Basra province.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A Molotov cocktail was thrown at a telecommunications booster station in the city of Lemona, in Vizcaya province.  The attack caused damages to the station's electrical panel but did not prevent the station from functioning as normal.
Police report that the body of 37-year-old Muslim worker was found alongside a road in the Rangae district of Narathiwat on Tuesday morning. The male victim was identified as Kachane Nimitsakul. Police believe that he was involved with insurgents. The victim's body had been beaten to death by insurgents and stabbed in numerous places with a machete.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Nazar Muhammad, an official from the Intelligence Bureau, was killed when suspected Taliban gunmen on motorcycles shot at him as he was traveling in his car in Darra Adam Khel on February 7.  Muhammad was on his way to Peshawar.  His driver was injured in the attack.
Suspected members of the Communist Party of India-Maoist (CPI-Maoist) opened fire on a security force picket in Chatra, killing one civilian and injuring two others.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives near a police patrol in Mosul.  The police were reportedly members of an explosives unit and were defusing a device when the attack occurred.  The bomber was killed in the blast, however no additional casualties were reported.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Police report that Islamic insurgents were behind an explosion that occurred near a helicopter landing pad just minutes before Thai Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn was scheduled to land in the Yaring district of Pattani on Wednesday morning. Two police officers were injured by the explosion. The three-kilogram bomb was hidden under a tree and detonated remotely by mobile phone. The blast left a crater in the ground measuring one meter by 35 centimeters.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Mohammad Yousuf Dar, a pro-India politician in Kashmir, was shot and killed in Hajin by unidentified gunmen while he was traveling in his car.  Dar was the vice-chairman of the Awami League party. Dar's wife and bodyguard were injured in the attack.
A car bomb detonated outside the al Isra wa al Mi'raj Mosque in the predominately Shiite Amin neighborhood of southwest Baghdad, killing six people and wounding ten others.  Attacks on religious shrines are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Palestinians fired one Qassam rocket from the Gaza Strip toward the town of Sederot.  No injuries or damage were reported.
Six members of the Pakistan People's Party were killed and two were injured when unidentified gunmen opened fire on their vehicle in Attock on February 9.  The attack may have been related to the elections, which are scheduled for later in 2007 or in 2008.
An election polling party was attacked by members of the United National Liberation Front (UNLF) in Ukhrul on February 9.  Three Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) officers, one election official, and one civilian were killed in the attack.  A CRPF officer was also injured.  The polling party was transporting electronic voting machines when it was attacked.  The UNLF later claimed responsibility for the attack.
A bomb exploded near the governor's office and a police directorate in Mosul, wounding ten policemen and seven civilians.  It is unclear if the bombing targeted police or the government building.
Police report that Islamic insurgents shot and killed a Muslim civilian outside a local mosque on Friday in Narathiwat. The victim was only twenty years old.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Gunmen in western Baghdad opened fire on a police car, killing one policeman and wounding another.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A car bomb exploded on a commercial street lined with auto repair shops in the Kamaliya district of east Baghdad, killing at least three people and wounding five others.  Attacks on crowded, public areas are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Police report that Islamic insurgents shot and killed a Buddhist truck driver on Saturday in a drive-by shooting in Pattani. The victim was 56-years-old. Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
The polling office of a Congress Party candidate for the upcoming election for the Mayang Imphal Assembly came under attack when an unidentified gunman fired at the office.  No one was reported to be injured, however.  The incident occurred in Imphal West on February 11.
A roadside bomb targeting the convoy of Colonel Faris al Ameri, the chief of police in Balad Ruz, wounded two of al Ameri's bodyguards as their convoy entered the city of Baqubah.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Authorities found three bodies of policemen in Mosul bearing gunshot wounds.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen ambushed Hussein al-Jaburi, the editor of the al-Safir daily, outside his home in Baghdad.  Al-Jaburi was seriously wounded in the attack and transported to Amman, Jordan for medical care.  He died in March from his injuries.
Kaji Pun, a member of the Gajedi Village Development Committee, was kidnapped in Rupanedhi by suspected members of the Communist Party of Nepal-Maoists (CPN-M).
A roadside bomb exploded outside a falafel shop in Baghdad's Bab al-Sharqi commercial district, killing nine people and wounding at least twenty others.  This was one of several violent attacks in Baghdad on this day and came on the one year anniversary (according to the Islamic calendar) of the bombing of Samarra's Golden mosque.
A suicide car bomber detonated his explosives near a convoy of tribal chieftains on their way to a meeting at the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan's headquarters in Khanaqin.  The attack killed the bomber but did not result in any other casualties.  Attacks on tribal leaders are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Seven bombs targeting Algerian police exploded across the countryside east of Algiers throughout the morning.  Five of the seven bombs were car bombs.  A total of six people were killed, two of whom were police officers. Thirteen were wounded, ten of whom were part of the security forces.The attacks were claimed by the Salafist Group for Call and Combat (GSPC) now called  the al-Qaeda Organization in the Land of the Islamic Maghreb.
Seven bombs targeting Algerian police exploded across the countryside east of Algiers throughout the morning.  Five of the seven bombs were car bombs.  A total of six people were killed, two of whom were police officers. Thirteen were wounded, ten of whom were part of the security forces.The attacks were claimed by the Salafist Group for Call and Combat (GSPC) now called  the al-Qaeda Organization in the Land of the Islamic Maghreb.
Suspected gunmen from the Communist Party of India-Maoist (CPI-Maoist) opened fire on a group of police officers who were escorting election officials in Malkangiri on February 13. Three police officers were injured in the attack.  The election officials were conducting the first set of polls for village-level elections.
Gunmen shot and killed a policeman in Samawa.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Police report that Islamic insurgents shot and injured a 40-year-old security volunteer and his 46-year-old neighbor in the Raman district of Yala around eight on Tuesday morning. The shooting occurred as the victim was parking his car in front of his home. He was shot in the torso while his neighbor was shot in the leg.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A remote-controlled bomb targeted a van carrying counter-narcotics police officers traveling in Nad Ali.  Two officers were killed and three were wounded by the explosion. Nad Ali is located in Helmand province, which is known for producing a large amount of opium.
Gunmen shot and killed Nazin Muhammad Ahmad, a female lawyer in Kirkuk.  Attacks on professionals are frequent in Iraq, as militants attempt to disrupt the country's reconstruction.
A car bomb exploded outside the al-Ulwiyyah Children's Hospital in southwest Baghdad, killing four people and wounding ten others.  Attacks on medical facilities are frequent in Iraq, as militants attempt to disrupt the country's reconstruction.
Police report that a married civilian couple were victims of a drive-by shooting carried out by Islamic insurgents on a rural road in the Rusoh district of Narathiwat on Wednesday afternoon. The couple were riding their motorcycle home when the attack occurred. The 48-year-old female victim died at the scene from bullet wounds to her back while her 71-year-old husband was left in critical condition.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Police report that one of their chief investigators was shot and killed by Islamic insurgents in a drive-by shooting late Wednesday in Pattani. The victim was 41-years-old.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Gunmen shot and killed a policeman in Mosul.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Islamic State of Iraq claimed responsibility for shooting a policeman in the tunnel leading to al-Qasr (the castle) in Mosul on this day.
A stun grenade detonated outside the Samawa police directorate, wounding a security guard.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
An explosive device targeting a police patrol in the al-Shuhada neighborhood of Mosul killed a policeman and wounded another.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb placed by members of the Hindu Defense Army exploded at the District Education Office in Birgunj on February 15.  Two other attacks occurred in Birgunj on the same day.  The Hindu Defense Army claimed that the attacks were to warn against people labeling Hindus as extremists.
Two police officers were shot and killed by gunmen in Tagab on February 16.  It is unclear whether the gunmen are members of the Taliban or were targeting the police officers for personal reasons.
Gunmen shot and killed a policewoman in her home in Hillah.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.Note, this incident may have occurred on 15 February.
Unidentified men exploded a percussion bomb in the Iranian city of Zahedan.  The bombing took place near a residential block, but caused no damage or injuries.
Police report that Islamic insurgents shot and killed a 33-year-old Muslim villager in a drive-by shooting in Narathiwat late Friday evening.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A suicide car bomber attempted to denote his explosives at a police checkpoint but was shot and killed by police.  The Associated Press reported that there were no other casualties, however Reuters stated that two policemen were wounded.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Mir Amza, an Afghan national, was hanged by members of the Taliban in Sangin.  The Taliban claimed responsibility for the incident, accusing Amza for spying for foreigners.
A group of perpetrators threw flammable liquid and Molotov cocktails at a control station belonging to the Eusko Tren railway company in Amorebieta.  The group also set fire to a ticket machine in the train station.  The attack caused damages to the station, but there were no reported casualties.
A bomb targeting police in the Wihdah area of western Mosul killed a policeman.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A remote-controlled car bomb exploded in the predominately Shiite Sadr City neighborhood of Baghdad, killing a policeman and wounding ten other people.  The attack occurred outside a restaurant and close to a police checkpoint.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Palestinians threw four Molotov cocktails at Israeli civilian vehicles traveling near Nablus.  There were no injuries or damage.
(4th of four locations in a coordinated attack)Police report that Islamic insurgents carried out numerous, large-scale coordinated attacks across the provinces of Narathiwat, Yala, Pattani, and Songkhla on Sunday night as locals and tourists alike celebrated Chinese New Year. In total, seven people were killed in the attacks while more than sixty are known to have been injured. The entire wave of attacks for the evening included 33 bombings, 14 arson attacks, and two drive-by shootings. The targets of attack included foreign tourist sites, Sino-Thais celebrating the holiday, hotels, karaoke bars, power grids, telephone lines, public schools and commercial businesses.In Songkhla, there were two coordinate bombings that took place in the Chana and Thepha districts of the city. There were no reported injuries, but the attacks were nonetheless noteworthy as insurgents attacks are relatively rare in Songkhla. Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Two explosives detonated near a gas station in Kirkuk, however did not result in casualties.  Attacks on the oil industry are frequent in Iraq; bombings at gas stations are also common, as they are often crowded with long lines of patrons waiting to buy fuel.
Armed militants killed a physician in Mosul.  Attacks on medical professionals are frequent in Iraq, as militants attempt to disrupt the country's reconstruction.
The beheaded body of an Afghan national was found in North Waziristan on February 19.  The victim's hands and feet had also been cut off.  Left by suspected members of the Taliban, a note with the body said that Nek Amal was an American spy working in Afghanistan.
Police report that an army lieutenant colonel was killed and his 12-year-old son seriously injured when a bomb exploded in front of their home in the Raman district of Yala on Monday morning. The victim was commander of a local ranger unit. The attack came the morning after an elaborate series of coordinated attacks by Islamic insurgents on Chinese New Year.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Police report that a group of soldiers escorting teachers to their homes in the Rusoh district of Narathiwat came under fire from Islamic insurgents Monday afternoon. One officer was seriously injured from the exchange of gunfire, but none of the teachers were harmed.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Gunmen kidnapped Abdel Razeq Hashim al-Khaqani, a journalist and editor at an Iraqi radio station, and his cousin while the two men were visiting relatives in the Jihad neighborhood of west Baghdad.  Days later their bodies were found bearing gunshot wounds in Baghdad.  Attacks on journalists and media assistants are frequent in Iraq.Note, the incident date is the date the deaths were reported.
Gunmen kidnapped Qasim Muhammad, the head of the Agriculture Department in Tikrit, and two of his guards.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.
A truck carrying two tanks of chlorine gas and a bomb exploded outside of the Shiite-owned Ahal al-Bait restaurant in Taji, killing nine people.  148 other people were treated for injuries and exposure to the gas.  Authorities believe that the attack was a crude attempt to detonate a chemical weapon.  Agence France-Presse, a news agency, reported that intelligence indicated that four similar truck bombs were to be driven to Baghdad from Ramadi by suicide bombers and that this attack could have been one of them.
Gunmen shot and killed Muhammad Hannun, the deputy chief of the Muthanna provincial council, and seriously wounded his companion as they left a mosque in the al-Khadr neighborhood of Samawa.  Hannun is the second member of the council to be killed in as many months.
A gas pipeline in a suburb of Quetta was blown up on February 20, disrupting gas supply to four districts in the Balochistan region.
Police report that a bomb planted by Islamic insurgents exploded at a busy traffic intersection in the Chaenae district of Narathiwat around 8:10 on Tuesday morning. No fatalities or injuries were reported.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A car bomb exploded near a restaurant in a Sadr City market district, killing three people and wounding as many as forty others.  Attacks on crowded, public areas, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A car bomb exploded in a Kirkuk market, wounding ten people.  Attacks on crowded, public areas, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed two members of a political party in Churachandpur on February 21.  The bodies of the members were found the next day.  The political party that they belonged to was not identified.
Police report that Islamic insurgents attacked and killed a 42-year-old Buddhist civilian in a drive-by shooting in the Sri Sakorn district of Narathiwat on Wednesday afternoon. The woman was driving her two-year-old nephew to the doctor's office at the time of the attack.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Authorities in Mosul found the body of a police captain who had been shot in the head.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded near a commercial complex in Kirkuk, resulting in property damage but no casualties.  Attacks on crowded, public areas, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Suspected members of the Taliban kidnapped an official from the Customs Department in Khost.  The kidnappers threatened to kill the official if the Customs Department did not leave the Khost area.
Palestinians fired a Qassam rocket from the Gaza Strip toward Israel.  No injuries or damage were reported.
A bomb exploded on a minibus as it passed through Baghdad's Shurja market, killing one person and wounding five others.  Attacks on transportation networks and marketplaces are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives near a housing complex in Baghdad, killing himself and a guard and wounding four others.  The attack occurred at the first checkpoint to a housing complex where several prominent Iraqi officials live, including Abd al Aziz al Hakim, the leader of the Unified Iraqi Coalition, and President Jalal Talabani.  CNN reported, however, that an official from the Interior Ministry stated that the attack did not target Hakim.The Islamic State of Iraq claimed responsibility for detonating a car bomb (no mention of a suicide bomber) near the gate of the enemy of al-Hakim headquarters, Abd al-Aziz al-Hakim, who is the head of the Shiite coalition on this day.
A roadside bomb targeting police in Nahrawan, southeast of Baghdad, killed a civilian and wounded two policemen and a civilian.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed a policeman near the passports department in Mosul.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Militants killed a policeman in the al Mustafa neighborhood of Baqubah.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded in Imphal West on February 25, injuring a Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) officer.  The officer was identified as Naren Kumar Sonia.
Molotov cocktails were thrown at an office of the Basque Nationalist Party (PNV) in Getxo, Vizcaya province.  The devices caused slight damage to the front wall of the building, but there were no reported casualties.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives at a police station in Ramadi, killing fifteen people, including two policemen, and wounding nine others.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Abdol Manan, a Daman District council member, was killed in his home on February 27.  It is unclear who is responsible for the attack or how Manan was killed.
Police report that four officers were injured by a roadside bomb in the Sri Sakhon district of Narathiwat on Monday morning. The police officers were escorting teachers to school when the 5-kg bomb was detonated by mobile phone.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A car bomb targeting civilians detonated in a parking lot in Baghdad's Karradah district, killing one person and wounding three others.  Attacks on crowded, public areas are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives in the lobby of a company in al-Ba'aj that makes cement barriers used by security services to protect government buildings and other infrastructure.  The blast killed four people and wounded six.  Attacks on businesses that provide services to the Iraqi government and security forces are frequent in Iraq.
Four police officers were killed and three more were wounded when suspected members of the Communist Party of India-Maoist (CPI-Maoist) attacked a police camp in Bihar on February 27.
Palestinians fired a Qassam rocket from the Gaza Strip toward Sha'ar Hanegev.  No injuries or damage were reported.  The attack was claimed by the Palestine Islamic Jihad.
Authorities in Baghdad found the body of a policeman who had been kidnapped two months earlier.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.Note, the incident date is the date the death was reported.  The date of the kidnapping is unknown.
Police guarding the Bab al-Sheikh police station in central Baghdad spotted a suicide truck bomber approaching the compound and fired shots into his vehicle.  The bomber crashed into a cement barrier and his explosives detonated, killing two civilians and wounding two policemen and one civilian.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A potential suicide bomber was arrested and detained by the police in Kandahar on February 28.  The bomber, found with explosives, was stopped while riding in a taxi.  The bomber's intended target is unknown.
Palestinians fired two Qassam rockets from the Gaza Strip toward a Jewish community bordering the northern Gaza Strip.  No injuries were reported, but some minor damage occurred at the location of the missile attack.  The attack was claimed by the Palestine Islamic Jihad.
Police report that Islamic insurgents detonated a roadside bomb as a security detail of soldiers and police were escorting workers to a rubber plantation in the Sungai Padi district of Narathiwat around 7:30 on Wednesday morning. Although no police or plantation workers were harmed, three soldiers were injured by the explosion. The blast left a hole in the road about one meter wide and 30 cm deep.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A bomb targeting a police convoy of a security commander exploded in Farah on March 1.  The blast, however, primarily resulted in casualties among a group of workers who had gathered nearby.  Reports indicated that between two and four people were killed and at least 20 may have been injured.  Two police officers were confirmed to have been among the injured.  It is also unclear whether the attack was a suicide attack or a remote-controlled explosion. A Taliban spokesperson issued a statement denying the group's responsibility for the incident.
Gunmen attacked a group of electricity workers who were performing maintenance operations on a road between Mahawil and Iskandariya in Hilla province.  As police arrived at the scene, clashes broke out.  A total of five people were killed and seven wounded in the shooting.  Attacks on utility workers are frequent in Iraq, as militants attempt to disrupt the country's reconstruction.
Militants threw an improvised explosive device (IED) at a police patrol responsible for guarding the Interior Ministry.  The attack occurred in east Baghdad and wounded two policemen.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Islamic Army in Iraq claimed responsibility for attacking police commandos from the Interior Ministry in the al-Mushahidah area of eastern Baghdad on this day.
Palestinians fired a Qassam rocket from the Gaza Strip toward Ashqelon.  No injuries or damage were reported.  The attack was claimed by the al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade.  The al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade is affiliated with the Fatah movement, but the exact linkage is not always clear.
A car bomb detonated in a used car market in the Habibiya neighborhood of Sadr City, a predominately Shiite district of Baghdad, killing as many as ten people and wounding seventeen others.  Attacks on crowded areas, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Police report that Islamic insurgents shot and injured a 36-year-old rubber trader in a drive-by shooting in the Tambon Yupoe district of Yala on Friday. The victim survived the attack despite suffering from three gunshot wounds. The insurgents attacked the man as he was conducting a business transaction with a local villager.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Gunmen kidnapped Staff Lieutenant General Thamir Sultan al-Tikriti, an advisor at the Ministry of Defense and a former commander in the Iraqi army, from the al-Jami'ah neighborhood of west Baghdad.  The next day, Iraqi troops stormed a home where al-Tikriti was being held and he was released.  Attacks on government officials and their staff are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in southwestern Baghdad's Saydiya neighborhood killed one police officer and wounded another.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed Lieutenant Colonel Fadil Rahim, a battalion commander of the Wolf Brigade, a division of the Iraqi national police and Interior Ministry, as he drove in Baghdad's Ghazaliyah neighborhood.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded at night in a CD store in the Inayat Kallay Bazaar in Bajaur on March 3.  The attack occurred a couple of hours after another bomb damaged barbershops in the bazaar.  No one was injured in either attack.  The incidents may have been connected to the recent distribution of pamphlets in the area warning men not to shave their beards.  It is suspected that Taliban sympathizers are responsible for the bombings.
Police report that a bomb detonated at the Yos Sudarso port in the eastern city of Ambon on Saturday morning. The explosion occurred just outside the port's exit door for passengers and in the vicinity of a sidewalk where street merchants sold goods and people waited for passengers.Police indicated that the bomb was homemade and packaged with a battery, coil, and a timer. The assailants also placed dozens of 10-centimeter long nails inside the package to maximize casualties. Thirteen bystanders were injured by the blast, one of whom remains in critical condition. Police have yet to identify suspects.
Gunmen shot and killed a former member of Saddam Hussein's Baath party as he left his home in Qadisiyah, Diwaniya province.  Attacks on members of Hussein's former regime are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on a police station in Baghdad's Azamiyah neighborhood, killing one policeman.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.The Islamic State of Iraq claimed responsibility for this attack, however stated that five police were killed.
Gunmen opened fire on a police station in the al-Zuhur neighborhood of Mosul, killing two policemen and wounding three others.
A bus driver was injured when unidentified perpetrators threw Molotov cocktails at the bus he was driving on the Kagithane-Eminonu line.  The attack took place in Ornektepe and targeted a bus belonging to the Istanbul Electricity, Tram and Tunnel (IETT) General Directorate.  The devices were unable to start a fire, as the bus driver threw them out of the bus before they detonated.
Gunmen shot and killed a policeman as he drove in Kirkuk.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb detonated in central Baghdad near Shiite pilgrims walking to Karbala, killing two people and wounding ten others.  One news source reported that the explosives targeted a police patrol and not the pilgrims.  Both attacks on police and pilgrims are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded at a general store in Darra Adamkhel on March 5.  No one was injured, although a lot of CDs that the store was selling were destroyed. The attack came after warnings against un-Islamic conduct had been issued to shop owners in the area.
A homemade explosive device, made of a pipe full of explosive powder and a fuse, was found in front of an unoccupied police station in Gelsomini Square, in Milan.  The Revolutionary Front for Communism claimed responsibility for the attempted attack and wrote, the attack unleashed is part of the more general revolutionary mobilization in retaliation against the recent arrests of comrades belonging to the proletarian vanguard movement.
A bomb exploded in an internet caf in the Gazan city of Khan Younis, destroying the establishment.  No casualties were reported.  Attacks on internet cafes have become more common in Gaza recently.
Police report that Islamic insurgents shot and killed a 21-year-old Buddhist man late Monday night in Yala. The victim worked as a security guard and he was using a public phone booth when the insurgents attacked him in a drive-by shooting.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A car bomb targeting Shiite pilgrims killed twelve people and wounded twenty-three others in Baghdad's Doura district.  Attacks on religious pilgrims are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Gunmen shot and killed Lieutenant Colonel Salam Fakhari, a police commander, and wounded four of his guards while they were on patrol in Suwayra.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.Note, the Washington Post reported that the patrol was hit by a roadside bomb.
At least two roadside bombs targeting Shiite pilgrims detonated in Baghdad, wounding a total of four people.  One exploded in the Ilaam neighborhood.  Attacks on pilgrims are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A suicide car bomber detonated his explosives at a police checkpoint in Mosul's Yarmouk district, killing four people and wounding sixteen others.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A tear gas attack at a Hilton hotel in Trinidad injured nine people, including five foreigners. The incident occurred during warm up maches for the 2007 Cricket World Cup-- members of the South African, Pakistani, Canadian, and Irish teams were present at the hotel. Members of the Communications Workers Union are being investigated in conjunction with the attacks.
Authorities in Karbala found and defused at least two car bombs reportedly targeting Shiite pilgrims who had traveled to the city to celebrate the Arbayeen holiday, the period of mourning after the death anniversary of Imam Hussein.  A number of suspects were also arrested.  Attacks on religious pilgrims are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A car carrying tribal elders associated with the government was the target of a motorcycle bomb in Sui on March 7.  One of the elders was killed and 12 others were injured.  The perpetrators of the attack have not been identified.
Police report that Islamic insurgents gunned down a married couple working at a rubber plantation in a drive-by shooting in the Bannang Sata district of Yala on Wednesday. The two victims, aged 50 and 60, were shot dead as they were working in the fields.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Militants stormed two police stations in Dhuluiya, Balad province, and kidnapped a policeman.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Militants fired at least four mortar shells on Baghdad International Airport.  One of the devices reportedly hit the seventh story of the airport.  No casualties were reported.The Islamic State of Iraq claimed responsibility for the attack.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed Karthigesu Lankapathi, the owner of a telecommunications firm, in Jaffna.
Police report that Islamic insurgents broke into the home of a 19-year-old Buddhist civilian in Yala and murdered him early Thursday morning. Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Gunmen killed Mohammed al-Gara'awi.  He was an official in the office of  Shi'ite cleric Moqtada al-Sadr.  Mr. Gara'awi was  killed in fornt of his house in northern Najaf.  Najaf is one hundred miles south of Baghdad.
The Pakistan Army defused a bomb at an all-girls secondary school in Kalaya.  The bomb had been planted in an area of the school under construction.
Police report that Islamic insurgents shot and killed a 53-year-old Buddhist civilian in a drive-by shooting as he was riding his motorcycle home late Friday in Pattani.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Gunmen opened fire on a police patrol in the Abu Ghraib neighborhood of western Baghdad, killing one policeman and two civilians.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A suicide car bomber, reportedly targeting civilians in the predominately Shiite Sadr City neighborhood of Baghdad, detonated his explosives at a military checkpoint outside Sadr City when he was unable to pass through.  The blast killed the bomber and seven soldiers and wounded scores of civilians.  The attack occurred as Shiites marked Arbayeen, the end of a forty day mourning period after the anniversary of the death of Imam Hussein, one of Shiite Islam's holiest days.
Eight police officers were killed and two others were injured when suspected members of the Taliban attacked a border police convoy in Arghestan on March 10.
Gunmen shot and killed a former member of Saddam Hussein's Baath party in Diwaniya.  Attacks on members of Hussein's former regime are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded in the reception area of the Iraqi Islamic Party headquarters in Mosul, killing three guards and wounding two others.  Authorities found an unidentified body among the wreckage, leading them to believe that the attack was carried out by a suicide bomber.  The bombing reportedly targeted the party's information office.  Attacks on government officials and political parties are frequent in Iraq.
A car bomb exploded at a police checkpoint in Baghdad's Karradah district, killing two people and wounding six others.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A suicide bomber blew himself up in an internet caf in a Casablanca slum, killing himself and injuring four other people.  The dead man's companion was also carrying explosives, and there is speculation that the caf was not the intended target.
Police report that Islamic insurgents shot and killed two workers from a rubber plantation in a drive-by shooting in the Bannang Sata district of Yala on Sunday evening. The two victims -- a brother and sister aged 45 and 48 -- were ambushed by insurgents while commuting home from work.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
An explosive device targeting police in Mosul killed four policemen.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen in Muqdadiya opened fire on Mudhir al Sadoon, a member of Parliament from the Iraqi Islamic Party, killing one of his guards and wounding four others. Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.
On March 12, the body of an unidentified man was found in Jandola with a note accusing him of being a spy for the United States.  The man had been beheaded.  Attacks like these have been occurring frequently in the North and South Waziristan regions.
Gas supply was disrupted in the area around Jinnah in Balochistan on March 12 when a section of gas pipeline was blown up.  A nearby water pipeline was also damaged by the explosion, disrupting water supply as well.
Police report that Islamic insurgents shot and killed a 41-year-old worker at a rubber plantation while he was working in the fields on Monday morning in the Betong district of Yala. Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A roadside bomb targeting a bus carrying employees of the Interior Ministry in the Waziriyah neighborhood of Baghdad killed two and wounded six others.  Attacks on government targets are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on police in east Baghdad's Zayuna district, killing three police and wounding two others.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Two police officers were killed and another was injured when members of the Taliban attacked a police security check point in Takhta Pol on March 13.  Retaliatory fire injured two of the Taliban. The attack occurred on the same day that the Taliban targeted another check point in Zabol.  A spokesperson for the Taliban claimed responsibility for both incidents, but claimed that eight police officers had actually been killed.
Police report that Islamic insurgents ambushed a police officer in the Bannang Sata district of Yala on Tuesday morning as he was on patrolling the area. The officer was rushed to the hospital by local villagers where he remains in serious condition.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Gunmen shot and killed three off-duty policemen just south of Hillah.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed two policemen in Mosul.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and injured the local police chief in Kifl and killed his driver.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Police report that Islamic insurgents hurled a grenade at the Al Mubarak mosque in the Yaha district of Yala city yesterday evening as local villagers were leaving the mosque following nightly prayers. Reports indicate that eleven people were injured by the attack, and at least two of them remain in critical condition. Insurgents pulled up in front of the mosque in a bronze sedan and tossed the grenade into the crowd.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A suicide bomber targeting the convoy of Sabir al-Issawi, the head of Baghdad's city council, detonated his explosives in the Karradah neighborhood of the capital, killing eight people and wounding three of al-Issawi's bodyguards.  Al-Issawi was not hurt.  The bombing took place near a military checkpoint.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb targeting employees of the General Company for Mechanical Industries in Iskandariyah killed six people and wounded twenty-three others as they arrived at work on a bus.  The company's general manager was shot and killed just two days before.  Attacks on businesses are frequent in Iraq. Note, some media agencies reported that the victims were state employees.  The company's relationship with the government is unclear.
Ansar al-Sunnah claimed responsibility for kidnapping Jamal Rashid Muhammad Ali, a deputy director at the Ministry of Defense, from Baghdad.  Ali's identification cards were posted on the internet.  The group did not set any conditions for his release.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed a policeman and a man who worked as a cook for police in Mosul.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Four people were injured when a bomb planted by suspected members of the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) exploded at a Shiva temple in Assam on March 15. The explosive device was described as a tablet bomb used in Kashmir.  It was the first time a tablet bomb had been used by the ULFA. The attack occurred the day before the ULFA's scheduled Army Day celebrations.
Police report that Islamic insurgents shot and injured a 53-year-old man in the Muang district of Yala on Thursday. The victim was riding a bicycle to purchase rubber when  insurgents ambushed him. Fortunately, he survived the wounds that he sustained.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Authorities in Kirkuk found the bodies of two policemen bearing gunshot wounds and signs of torture.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
An explosive device detonated by  Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) killed six people and injured 14 in Buenaventura. The bomb was placed on the outskirts of the city, and counted among its victims both police officers and pedestrians.
Police report that Islamic insurgents shot and injured an off-duty police officer in a drive-by shooting in Pattani on Friday. The 57-year-old senior sergeant-major was riding home when insurgents attacked. He was shot in the face and rushed to the hospital for treatment.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A roadside bomb exploded in a market in Hillah, killing one person and wounding five others.  Attacks on public areas, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Gunmen shot and killed a police force lieutenant colonel from the Directorate of Inter-urban Motorways as he drove east of Tikrit.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Militants abducted Hamid al-Duleimi, a journalist and producer at al-Nahrain, an Iraqi television station, as he left the station's offices in Baghdad.  His body was found two days later at the Baghdad morgue bearing signs of torture.  Two reporters from the station were killed in May 2006 after being stopped at a fake checkpoint in Baghdad.
A car bomb exploded in a market in Baghdad's predominately Shiite Shaab neighborhood, killing six people and wounding thirty others.  One source reported that the bombing targeted people cooking on the street to offer as charity during a Shiite holiday marking the death of the Prophet Mohammed.  Attacks on public areas are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A roadside bomb targeting police in Kirkuk wounded three policemen.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.Note, one media agency reported that the three policemen were killed in the bombing.
A bomb detonated near Murjan public hospital in Hillah, Babil government, wounding one person.  Attacks on medical facilities are frequent in Iraq, as militants attempt to disrupt the country's reconstruction.
A roadside bomb exploded on a busy street outside Mustansiriyah University in Baghdad, killing two people and wounding four others.  Attacks on educational institutions are frequent in Iraq, as militants attempt to disrupt the country's reconstruction.  Mustansiriyah University is often targeted because of its predominately Shiite student body.
A CD shop in Peshawar was the target of an attack on March 18 when a bomb hidden in a plastic bag exploded.  The bag was left by an unidentified person with the store's guard.  The guard and another person were injured by the blast.  The store had previously received threats that claimed it was selling un-Islamic materials.
As many as five car bombs exploded in Kirkuk within thirty minutes of each other.  One car bomb reportedly targeted a senior officer in Saddam Hussein's former army.  The blast occurred near a communication tower.  No casualties were reported.
As many as five car bombs exploded in Kirkuk within thirty minutes of each other.  One exploded near the Directorate of Education, however no casualties were reported.
A bomb targeting a bus in Dujail killed the bus's driver and wounded the co-driver.  Attacks on transportation networks are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Militants fired mortar shells at the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan in Baghdad, wounding four security guards.  Attacks on political parties and government officials are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen kidnapped Khalaf Ghargan, the mayor of Dijelah, a Shiite village south of Baghdad.  The mayor was ambushed and forcefully taken from his car.  His body was later found bearing gunshot wounds along a highway.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.
A car bomb detonated outside the al Huda girls' high school in Kirkuk, wounding nine people.  Attacks on educational institutions are frequent in Iraq, as militants attempt to disrupt the country's reconstruction.
Suspected members of the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) threw grenades in a market in Nalbari on March 19. One person was killed and two others were injured.
Two railway station guards were found dead after being shot with automatic weapons at the railway station in Karabulak, Ingushetia.  Their weapons had not been stolen after their murder.
Gunmen ambushed two trucks delivering food near the village of Akreesh, east of Tikrit, and kidnapped the drivers.  Attacks on truck drivers are frequent in Iraq, as militants attempt to disrupt the country's reconstruction.
A car bomb detonated in a commercial district in the Karradah neighborhood of Baghdad, killing two people and wounding seven others.  Attacks on crowded areas, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.Note, other media outlets reported that the bombing occurred near the 14th of July suspension bridge and one entrances to the Green Zone, the heavily fortified area of the capital housing the Iraqi government and the US and British embassies.
Police found the body of a policeman, bearing stab wounds and signs of torture, in Kirkuk.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Police report that Islamic insurgents torched a public school building in the Yaha district of Yala in the early morning hours Tuesday. Although the fire caused great damage to the school, no injuries were reported as the building was empty at the time of the attack.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Insurgents from the  Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) detonated an explosive in the Nueva Granada neighborhood of Buenaventura. The bomb was remote-detonated,  contained about 60 kilograms of explosives, and was set off in the open street.
Gunmen shot and killed an army brigadier general who worked under Saddam Hussein and another person in Fallujah.  Attacks on members of Hussein's former regime are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb targeting police in east Baghdad wounded two policemen.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Suspected members of the Taliban kidnapped and beheaded a truck driver transporting supplies for NATO and United States military forces near Shah Joy.  The beheaded body of the driver was found in Shah Joy on March 21.
Militants kidnapped a police lieutenant colonel and his driver in Dour, near Tikrit.  The next day their bodies were found.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Militants abducted Hamad al-Zuwayni, a teacher at the al-Jihad school in Baghdad.  Authorities later found Al-Zuwayni's body near a police station in Baghdad's al-Bayya district.  Attacks on educators are frequent in Iraq, as militants attempt to disrupt the country's reconstruction.  Note, the news source reported that elements of the Mahdi Army, a Shiite militia with ties to cleric Moqtada al-Sadr, are suspected of involvement in the kidnapping.
Electricity supply was disrupted around Batticaloa when suspected members of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) blew up a high tension electricity tower.  No injuries were reported, however.
Police report that Islamic insurgents shot and killed a local villager in a drive-by shooting in the Rueso district of Pattani on Wednesday afternoon. The victim was riding home when insurgents ambushed him. Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol near the Azadi bridge in Kirkuk exploded, however did not cause any casualties.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives inside the private mosque of Deputy Prime Minister Salam al-Zubaie as al-Zubaie attended Friday prayers at his home in Baghdad.  A car bomb simultaneously detonated near an attached garage. The attack killed nine people, including Zubaie's brother and six of his bodyguards. Al-Zubaie was among the fourteen people who were seriously wounded in the blast.  According to the Associated Press, this is at least the third major security breach involving a top politician in four months.  Al-Zubaie's convoy was targeted by gunmen in December.  Al-Zubaie is a member of the Iraqi Islamic Party, a part of the largest Sunni bloc in parliament, and has been criticized by Sunni insurgents for joining the Shiite government.   Authorities reported that the suicide bomber is believed to be Wahad al-Saadi, a distant relative of al-Zubaie and a member of his security detail who was the only person at the prayer service who was not accounted for after the bombing.  An aide of al-Zubaie reported that al-Saadi had been removed from the Deputy Prime Minister's security detail for causing trouble but was still on the payroll.  Because he was still employed by al-Zubaie and was a relative, he would not have been searched upon entering the mosque.  Al-Saadi had been arrested for alleged involvement in insurgenct activity but was released after al-Zubaie became involved on his behalf.  A cook who is believed of assisting al-Saadi on the day of the attack remains unaccounted for.  The Islamic State of Iraq claimed responsibility for the bombing, accusing al-Zubaie of sell[ing] his religion and his people for a cheap price.
A bomb hanging from a tree exploded as a police patrol passed under it in Visakhapatnam on March 23.  The attack, which was conducted by suspected members of the Communist Party of India-Maoist (CPI-M), continued as gunmen opened fire on the convoy.  One police officer was killed and two others were injured.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives outside a pastry shop in a Tal Afar market, killing ten people and wounding three others.  Iraqi television reported that soldiers may have been among the casualties.  Attacks on crowded public areas, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Militants attacked a police checkpoint in a commercial area of Baghdad with rocket-propelled grenades (RPGs), killing a civilian and wounding two others.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives at a police station in the village of Suhada, in the city of Qaim near the Syrian border.  This was one of three coordinated suicide attacks targeting police in the area on this day.  A total of eight people were killed and at least twenty wounded.  The Islamic State of Iraq claimed responsibility for the bombings, stating that the operations were party of the al-Karamah (dignity) Plan- the Avenging the Honor Conquest.
After attacking a communication tower, suspected members of Ansar al-Islam attacked a police checkpoint in Sulaymaniyah, wounding two of the guards.  Authorities reported that the perpetrators also planted explosives around the checkpoint but police were able to defuse them without incident.
A bomb placed next to the wall of a police post in Sibbi exploded on March 24.  The blast damaged the building, but no one was injured.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in Tikrit killed a police captain and wounded three other police.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Militants detonated a bomb at the Sunni Usama bin Zaid mosque in Haswa and then burned the structure.  No casualties were reported. The attack was one of four on Sunni mosques in Haswa on this day, all apparently in response to the bombing of a Shiite mosque the day before.  It is unclear of the attacks were coordinated.
Gunmen opened fire on the Diyala police directorate, however no casualties were reported.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed Ali Muhammad Amin, the director of a natural gas factory, outside his home in Mosul.  Attacks on utility infrastructure are frequent in Iraq, as militants work to disrupt the country's reconstruction.
Militants fired mortars on the Green Zone, the heavily fortified area of Baghdad that houses the Iraqi government and the US and British embassies.  A total of ten people were wounded in this attack and another on 24 March.
A bomb exploded at a section of oil pipeline in Rajanpur on March 25. The pipeline was owned by Parco and was undergoing repairs when the attack occurred.
Militants detonated explosives under an oil pipeline outside of Baiji, causing a large fire but no casualties.  Attacks on oil infrastructure are frequent in Iraq, as militants attempt to disrupt one of the country's most profitable industries.
Militants fired rocket-propelled grenades (RPGs) at a Sunni mosque in Iskandariyah.  No casualties were reported, however clashes broke out after the attack in which two people were killed and two others wounded.  Attacks on religious shrines are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
An improvised explosive device (IED) targeting a police patrol in the al-Qadisiyah neighborhood of Kirkuk wounded a policeman.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A suicide car bomber detonated his explosives in Rusafa square in central Baghdad, near the Shorja market, killing himself and two civilians and wounding five other people.  Attacks on crowded public areas, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Militants fired mortars on the Green Zone, the heavily fortified area of Baghdad that houses the Iraqi government and the US and British embassies.  The Green Zone was targeted with mortars twice on this day.
The Biratnagar office of Kantipur Publications was the target of a bomb attack by the Nepal Defense Army (NDA) on March 26.  The bomb, however, failed to explode.  The NDA left pamphlets claiming responsibility for that and another attack that occurred on the same day in Morang.  According to the pamphlets, NDA wants to make Nepal a Hindu state.
A bomb attached to a motorcycle exploded outside of a bank in Tank, injuring four people.  The president of the North West Frontier Province (NWFP) Olympic Association and a former Senator were among those injured.
A suicide car bomber detonated his explosives at the al-Jazeera restaurant, a restaurant in Ramadi popular with police, killing at least seventeen people and wounding thirty-two others.  Police were reported to be among the casualties.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A sniper opened fire on police in central Baghdad, killing one and wounding another.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb targeting the convoy of the head of Ninawa's provincial council wounded two of the official's guards.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in southeastern Baghdad killed a policeman and wounded two others.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Militants detonated explosives in the Sunni Hitteen mosque in Iskandariyah, destroying the structure.  Attacks on religious shrines are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A doctor and four nurses were kidnapped by suspected members of the Taliban on March 27.  They were traveling to Kandahar from a medical camp they worked at in Zheray when the kidnapping occurred.  The doctor was from Kandahar's Public Health Department.
A workshop led by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) in Peshawar was the target of a bomb attack on March 27.  No one was injured, however.
Police report that Islamic insurgents opened fire on a house under construction in Pattani on Tuesday, killing a 28-year-old electrician and seriously wounding another who were working at the site. The victims were likely targeted because they were Buddhist, as insurgents spared the lives of other workers at the scene.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A roadside bomb targeting police from the al-Urouba police station in Kirkuk killed a policeman and wounded two others.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed a former member of Saddam Hussein's Baath party in Karbala.  Attacks on members of Hussein's former regime are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb exploded near a shopping district in Muqdadiya, killing a civilian.  Attacks on public areas, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A car bomb detonated in a market in southwestern Baghdad's Bayya district, killing three people and wounding ten others.  Attacks on public areas, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Gunmen shot and killed Nawaf al-Hadidi, the imam of a mosque in Mosul.  Attacks on religious figures are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A police officer was killed when members of the Taliban attacked a police vehicle in Adraskan on March 28.  The officer was guarding a construction company when the attack occurred.  A spokesperson for the Taliban issued a statement claiming the group's responsibility for the attack, although he said that they had actually killed eight police officers.
Palestinian militants fired a Qassam rocket from the Gaza Strip toward the western Negev.  No injuries or damage were reported.
Five people were injured when a grenade was thrown at a crowd leaving a ceremony at a school in Sar i Pul.  The perpetrator of the attack was not identified, although the police reported that three people had been arrested after the attack. The event was an inauguration ceremony for the school.
Two suicide bombers detonated their explosives in the Shalal market in Baghdad's predominately Shiite Shaab neighborhood, killing eighty-two people and wounding 102 others.  The market is in an area patrolled by the 82nd Airborne Division, the first additional US brigade to arrive in Baghdad as part of the troop surge.  Residents stated that the market is barricaded on both ends to prevent such attacks.  According to Hassan Soneid, a Shiite lawmaker, the terrorists are attacking [these] areas to embarrass the government, to prove to the people that the government is not able to protect those people, so those people will call for the militias to come back to help them.
Gunmen kidnapped three policemen from the main road between Samarra and Dour.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed a policeman near his home in Diwaniya.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Three suicide bombers detonated their explosives in quick succession in Khalis, killing a total of forty-three people and wounding eighty-six others.  The first suicide bomber targeted a market that was especially crowded because government flour rations were being distributed for the first time in six months.  The two other bombings occurred near a police checkpoint and near a hospital where police were arriving at the scene.   In addition, two roadside bombs detonated along the road leading to the main hospital and mortar fire was reported.  Note, one news agency reported that this attack may have also targeted a joint police-military patrol.
Palestinian militants fired a Qassam rocket from the Gaza Strip toward the western Negev. No injuries or damage were reported.
Police report that Islamic insurgents shot and killed a 51-year-old male civilian in a drive-by shooting in Narathiwat on Thursday. The victim was ambushed by insurgents as he was driving his motorcycle.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Militants fired rockets on a radio and television building in the Karamah neighborhood of eastern Mosul.  No casualties were reported.  Attacks on telecommunication infrastructure are frequent in Iraq.
A grenade that targeted a police station in Doda, injuring twelve people at a nearby store.  A police officer was also injured.  The grenade was thrown by an unidentified person.
Police report that Islamic insurgents shot and killed a 49-year-old man in front of his house late Friday evening in the latest drive-by shooting in Pattani. The victim died at the scene.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Gunmen opened fire on an employee of al-Iraqiya Television, killing him as he drove in Baghdad.  Attacks on al-Iraqiya, a state television channel that provides news and other programming, has been targeted by militants in the past.
A car bomb targeting police in Mosul injured six people.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed a representative of Shiite cleric Moqtada al-Sadr in Jibla, near Hillah.  Attacks on religious officials are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Police report that Islamic insurgents detonated a roadside bomb in Yala province on Saturday. The blast seriously wounded two Buddhist civilians, a married couple. Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A roadside bomb targeting the convoy of Omar al-Jubouri and Umar Abd-al-Sattar, members of parliament from the Sunni Islamic Party, detonated in the Yarmouk area of western Baghdad.  The Islamic Party reported that no one was injured in the attack, however police sources stated that two security guards were wounded.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.
Explosives targeting police in Mosul detonated, however no information on casualties was available.  This was one of two bomb attacks on police in Mosul on this day.
Gunmen shot and killed a police lieutenant colonel and wounded his driver in Tikrit.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Suspected members of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) shot and killed six aid workers and injured two others in Batticaloa on April 1. The workers had been helping with the construction of the Village of Hope, a project aiding orphaned children.
A bomb detonated in a Khalis market, killing and wounding an unknown number of individuals.  Attacks on public areas, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivation.  A suicide bomber detonated his explosives in another market in Khalis on this day.
Gunmen abducted nine people who work at an electrical company as they returned home from work.  Attacks on Iraq's utility infrastructure are frequent in Iraq, as militants attempt to disrupt the country's reconstruction.
Militants fired a mortar on the Imuma school in Baghdad, causing only damages.  Attacks on educational institutions are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded in a bus heading to Bibile in Ampara on April 2, killing at least 16 people and injuring 25 others.  The bomb was suspected to have been planted on a luggage rack in the bus by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE).  One soldier riding on the bus was among those killed.  Two other soldiers were among the injured.
Gunmen shot and killed two policemen in Latifiyah, south of Baghdad.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on a police vehicle in the Adhemiyah neighborhood of Baghdad, killing one policeman and wounding another.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed a policeman in Kut.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb targeting a police patrol in Kirkuk detonated, wounding two policemen and a civilian.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Maulvi Abdul Salam, a local cleric in Marja, was shot and killed by unidentified gunmen on his way home from the market on April 3.
Police report that an Islamic insurgent stormed into the home of local Muslim villager and shot him dead as he watched television in the Sukirin district of Narathiwat on Tuesday evening. The 29-year-old victim died at the scene, but his wife and children escaped unharmed.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Gunmen opened fire on a minibus carrying employees of a power plant in Hawija, killing eleven people.  Attacks on Iraq's utility infrastructure are frequent in Iraq.  Militants killed eight utility workers in the area just days before.
Gunmen kidnapped Major General Fuad Faris, a former chief of police in Diwaniya, as he stood outside his home.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen kidnapped Khamaei Mushin, a well-known television presenter during the rule of Saddam Hussein and most recently a reporter on social and cultural life for Radio Free Iraq, a US-funded station.  Two days after her abduction, police found her body bearing gunshot wounds in west Baghdad.  Attacks on journalists are frequent in Iraq.
Police report that Islamic insurgents shot and killed two elderly civilians in a drive-by shooting in the Rueso district of Narathiwat on Wednesday morning. The two victims were attacked as they were finishing breakfast at a local tea shop. They both died at the scene. Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A roadside bomb targeting police in southern Baghdad's Doura district wounded a policeman.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Militants fired two rockets on Kanan, southeast of Baqubah.  The devices landed near a school and a police station, wounding four children.  It is unclear which target the perpetrators intended to hit, however both are frequently attacked.
A bomb targeting police in western Baghdad's Adel neighborhood killed two policemen and wounded six others.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
The City District Women Degree College in Peshawar was the target of an attack when a bomb exploded nearby on April 5.  Two people may have been injured.  The perpetrators of the attack are unknown.  One source stated that no injuries were reported, however AFP sad two citizens were wounded.
Police report that Islamic insurgents shot and killed a 52-year-old assistant village leader in a drive-by shooting in the Rusoh district of Narathiwat late Thursday night. The militants attacked the victims as they were in route to guard a public school for the night. The second victim, a 45-year-old chairman of the local village, survived the attack, but was injured by the gunfire. Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A roadside bomb targeting police in Hawija injured four policemen.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A car bomb targeting police exploded in Mosul.  No information on casualties was available.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb detonated near the College of Law in Kirkuk, wounding three people.  Attacks on educational institutions are frequent in Iraq, as militants attempt to disrupt the country's reconstruction.
A bus heading to Quetta was partially damaged when a bomb exploded at a bus terminal in Peshawar on April 6.  No injuries were reported, however.
Police report that Islamic insurgents set fire to a wooden public school building in the Parane district of Pattani in the early morning hours on Friday. The two-storey building was burnt to the ground despite the efforts of local firemen to extinguish the blaze.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Militants fired a mortar on an Interior Ministry building, wounding four policemen.  Attacks on government targets and police are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb exploded outside a liquor shop along the Baghdad-Kirkuk highway, damaging several stores.  Attacks on liquor stores are frequent in Iraq, as some extremists believe that the sale of alcohol violates Islamic law.
Armed men stormed the Kinaan market in Baqubah at 10am and ordered at least twenty-one shop owners to abandon their stalls.  They then set fire to the marketplace, causing an estimated one million Iraqi dinars worth of damage.
Unidentified persons threw a number of bottles with incendiary ingredients over the very tall cement fence of an army barracks.  No one was injured, but one of the bottles hit a car and lit it on fire, which was quickly put out.
A roadside bomb targeting police in the Adhamiyah district of northern Baghdad killed a policeman and wounded seven others.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A sniper shot and killed a policeman in the al-Majmu'ah al-Thaqafiyah area of western Mosul.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A radio-controlled bomb exploded outside of a camp in Dantewada on April 8, injuring a Special Police Officer (SPO).  The incident occurred on the same day that four SPOs were injured in another attack at the camp.
Suspected members of the Taliban exploded a bomb at a barber shop in Darra Adamkhel on April 9.  No injuries were reported. The shop had been warned that shaving men's beards was un-Islamic.
A roadside bomb targeting police in the al-Husayn area of Samawa injured three policemen.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed Sheikh Gelan Abdullah, a preacher at a Sunni mosque and a member of the Khalis city council, near his home in Hibhib.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.
Police report that a bomb exploded in front of a popular movie theater a few minutes after eleven o'clock on Monday evening in Bangkok. The explosion damaged three telephone booths and caused panic in the area, but no injuries or deaths were reported.The site of this attack was also one of the nine targets during the New Year's Eve attacks earlier this year. Given that the area was largely deserted at the hour of the attack, police believe that the bombing was intended to cause panic rather than causalities. No suspects have been identified at this time.
Police report that Islamic insurgents detonated a bomb on a bridge in the Tasap sub-district of the Muang district in Yala around 12:30pm on Monday. One male bystander was wounded by the blast.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A female suicide bomber detonated her explosives among a group of police recruits in Muqdadiyah, killing herself and sixteen other people. At least thirty-three were wounded in the blast.  The victims were waiting to learn the results of exams they had taken days earlier to become policemen.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
According to an American military spokesman, militants launched at least seven mortar attacks on the Green Zone, the heavily fortified area of Baghdad that houses the Iraq government and the US and British embassies, in the first ten days of April.  No casualties were reported in the bombings.  Attacks on the Green Zone are frequent in Iraq.Note, exact dates were not given for each attack.  The incident date listed is the date the attacks were reported.
A bomb exploded near the car of an Albanian opposition politician, who is also the editor of a local newspaper, damaging the car.  Erion Brace, editor of Zeri I Populi, parked his car outside of the newspaper headquarters shortly before the bomb exploded. The article postulates that this is because of negative coverage in the newspaper of Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha.
Police report that Islamic insurgents gunned down a 38-year-old village security volunteer in a drive-by shooting in the Rangae district of Narathiwat on Tuesday. The female victim was shot dead while driving to the district office where she worked as a security guard.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (formerly the Salafist Group for Call and Combat) detonated three suicide car bombs near a government building in Algiers.  The attack killed 23 people and injured 162 others.  The bombers were targeting the office of Prime Minister Abdulaziz Belkhadem; however, he escaped unharmed from the blast. The attack was later claimed by Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb.  Some reports indicate the suicide bombers trained in Iraq prior to the attack. The attack is the most deadly perpetrated by the Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb since their re-branding from the GSPC.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol in Mosul killed one policeman and wounded two others.  Six civilians were also injured in the blast.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
One police officer was killed and two others were wounded when they were attacked while traveling in Laghman on April 11.  The identities of the attackers are unknown.
Police report that Islamic insurgents shot and killed a 19-year-old Buddhist civilian in a drive-by shooting in the Yala on Wednesday morning. The victim's 47-year-old mother was also severely injured in the attack.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Gunmen abducted Hamal Sulayman Aziz, a colonel under Saddam Hussein, and killed his driver in Mosul.  Attacks on members of Hussein's former regime are frequent in Iraq.
A truck bomb detonated on the Sarafiya Bridge in Baghdad, killing at least ten people, wounding twenty-six others, and destroying much of the structure.  Witnesses reported that a man drove the vehicle onto the bridge at about 7am, exited the truck, examined the underside, and then disappeared.  Commuters stopped at a police checkpoint became suspicious and police began to evacuate the area, however the bomb exploded soon after.  The bridge connected the predominately Sunni Azamiyah neighborhood and the mixed Bab al-Muazam area of the capital.  The Associated Press reported that the structure was damaged in two places, suggesting that two devices could have detonated.  It was also reported that the attack was carried out by a suicide bomber.  The attack occurred on the same day as a suicide bombing in a cafeteria where lawmakers had gathered just feet away from the Iraqi Parliament's main chamber.  It is unclear if the attacks were coordinated.
Gunmen opened fire on the offices of the Iraqi Islamic Party in Iskandariyah, seriously wounding a guard.  Attacks on government targets and political parties are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb targeting police commandos in Hillah killed a policeman and wounded three others.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.McClatchy Newspapers reported that the attack targeted and killed police Lt. Col. Falih Hassan.
Gunmen shot and killed Muhammad Abd-al-Hamid al-Nu'yami, a mosque imam in Mosul and a member of the Association of Muslim Scholars.  Al-Nu'yami's brother was also killed in the shooting.  Attacks on religious figures are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Police report that Islamic insurgents shot and killed a 19-year-old male student in a drive-by shooting in the Tak Bai district of Narathiwat on Friday. The victim, who was Muslim, was riding a motorbike to an Islamic school when two insurgents attacked him. Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
Police report that Islamic insurgents torched the signal towers of four mobile phone stations in the Muang district of Pattani on Friday night. The attacks took place around 9:40pm. No injuries were reported, but the signal towers were all damaged.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004.
A bomb hidden in a trash can in Baghdad's Bayaa district detonated as a police patrol passed, injuring three electricity workers who were nearby.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed a former member of Saddam Hussein's Baath party in Samawa.  Attacks on former members of Hussein's regime are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen attacked the Baghdad home of Adnan al-Dulaimi, a senior Sunni politician and leader of the General Council for the People of Iraq, wounding six of his guards.  Al-Dulaimi was not at home at the time.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.
Militants kidnapped six drivers of fuel trucks in northeast Baqubah.  The next day the men's bodies were found; five were Iranian.  Attacks on truck drivers and the oil industry are frequent in Iraq.
Two roadside bombs targeting police in the Karrada neighborhood of Baghdad killed eight civilians and wounded twenty others.  Three police were wounded in the bombing.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A minibus loaded with explosives detonated in the Karrada district of Baghdad, killing eleven people and wounding fifteen others.  The vehicle was parked outside a sweets shop on a busy street of electronic stores.  Witnesses reported that the bus did not arise suspicion because minibuses normally waited for passengers there.  Attacks on crowded areas are frequent in Iraq.
Militants attacked the al-Niba'ie police checkpoint in Dujail.  Police returned fire and the militants escaped, however were able to abduct fifteen civilians.
A car bomb exploded near the Al Imam al Mahdi Husseiniyah Shiite mosque in the Abu Ghraib neighborhood of west Baghdad.  No casualties were reported.  Attacks on religious shrines are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives at a police directorate in Ishaqi, killing nine people and wounding ten others.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on police in the Amil neighborhood of western Baghdad, wounding a policeman and a civilian.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb detonated along a commercial street in the Karrada neighborhood of Baghdad.  As police and first responders arrived at the scene, a second device exploded.  Eight people were killed and twenty-three wounded in the bombings.  Militants often coordinate bombings to target civilians and first responders.  This is the second day in a row that the area was hit by explosions.
Gunmen shot and killed a member of the Hawija sub-district council and injured his son.  Attacks on local government officials are frequent in Iraq.
Police report that Islamic insurgents carried out a spree of arson attacks against nine schools and government buildings in the Yarang and Muang districts of Pattani during the early morning hours Monday. No injuries were reported, but the fires caused extensive damage to the buildings.Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Police report that Islamic insurgents shot and killed the driver for a local official in front of his home in Yala on Monday. The attack occurred only two kilometers from an insurgent drive-by attack against another government official earlier the same day. Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
An improvised explosive device (IED) detonated outside the home of Ghazi Smari, the director of the Basra electricity power plant.  IEDs also exploded outside the homes of Khaz'aal Al Sa'idi, a member of the Fadhila party, and Nassef al Ebadi, the deputy of the Basra council.
Militants fired mortars on a Baqubah hospital, injuring five hospital employees.  Attacks on medical facilities are frequent in Iraq, as militants attempt to disrupt the country's reconstruction.
Gunmen attacked the headquarters of the Iraqi Islamic Party in the Amiriya and Ghazaliya neighborhoods of Baghdad.  The political party's offices were also attacked in Basra on this day.  Attacks on government officials and political parties are frequent in Iraq.
A car bomb targeting police in Hawija killed a policeman and two civilians and wounded four other people.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Police report that Islamic insurgents shot and killed two Buddhist men in a brutal drive-by shooting in the Si Sakhon district of Narthiwat on Tuesday. The two victims -- a 51-year old man and 50-year-old man -- worked as tractor drivers. They were involved in a roadwork project when the insurgents attacked. Insurgents shot both men dead and decapitated the 50-year-old man. Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives near the convoy of Brigadier General Ali Ata Mulawwah al-Juburi, the head of the al-Qayyarah police department in Ninawa province, killing himself and wounding al-Juburi.  An unknown number of bodyguards were also wounded.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A suicide car bomber detonated his explosives near a police patrol in the Uaireej area of southwest Baghdad, killing himself and two police officers and wounding two civilians and two police.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
After a car bomb detonated at the only pedestrian entrance to the Sadriyah market in central Baghdad, killing 127 people and wounding 148 others, a sniper opened fire on police and first responders, killing at least one person and wounding two others.  Militants often coordinate attacks to target emergency personnel arriving at the scene of an earlier incident.
Police report that Islamic insurgents detonated two bombs targeting electricity poles in the Tak Bai district of Narathiwat near the border with Malaysia on Wednesday morning. No injuries were reported. Islamic insurgents in Thailand's south continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Police report that Islamic insurgents set fire to a temporary shelter for workers at a shrimp fishing company in the Muang district of Pattani on Wednesday night. No fatalities were reported.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Three explosions occurred simultaneously in three different towns of the sub-prefect of Bayonne.  In Saint Jean de Luz an explosive device shattered the windows of an estate agent's office.  Although an anonymous caller warned an hour ahead of these three explosions, there has been no claim of responsibility for the attacks occurring days before French elections.
Gunmen opened fire on police in the Waziriya district of northern Baghdad, killing two policemen and wounding three others.  This was one of two attacks targeting police in the area on this day.
Six police officers from Karelia were wounded when unidentified attackers shot at road block No. 39 in the Zavodskoy district in Grozny.  The attackers shot from  a radio factory building and escaped without being captured.
A branch of the Caisse d'epargne, a savings bank in Marseille, was severely damaged in an attack.  There have been a series of attacks preceding the French presidential elections.
Police report that Islamic insurgents torched an elementary school early Friday morning in Narathiwat. No injuries were reported. The arson attack occurred a few hours before the Thai Prime Minister was scheduled to arrive in the troubled region for a one-day visit. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A roadside bomb targeting the convoy of Mehdi Abdul Hussein al-Najem, the mayor of Mussayab, killed al-Najem and two of his bodyguards.  After the explosives detonated, gunmen opened fire on the convoy.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb targeting police in Kirkuk wounded a policeman.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A bomb exploded on a minibus in Sadr City, a predominately Shiite area of Baghdad, killing two people and wounding five others.  A nearby bus was also damaged.  DPA, a German daily, reported that the bomb was designed to detonate as it passed an access point to Sadr City.  Attacks on transportation networks are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Police report that two masked Islamic insurgents opened fire at a Buddhist monk and his military escort in a drive-by shooting in the Rangae district of Narathiwat on Saturday morning. The Buddhist novice was making his rounds collecting alms when the gunman opened fire. Fortunately, no one was injured.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Gunmen opened fire on police in Diyala, killing one and wounding another.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A suicide car bomber detonated his explosives outside a police headquarters in the Bayya area of Baghdad.  A second bomber detonated his explosives at a checkpoint outside the building.  Five policemen and eight civilians were killed in the coordinated attack; forty-six police and thirty-six civilians were wounded.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Police report that Islamic insurgents shot and seriously injured a 23-year-old Buddhist man in a drive-by shooting in the Rangae district of Narathiwat on Sunday. The victim was shot at close range by a gunman as he sat drinking tea in front of a tea shop. The victim was rushed to the local hospital where his condition remains unknown.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Gunmen shot and killed Brigadier General Jamal Abdullah, a former army officer under Saddam Hussein, in the Adl area of western Baghdad.  Attacks on members of Hussein's former regime are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on the Tunisian Embassy in the Mansour neighborhood of western Baghdad, wounding two security guards.  Attacks on embassies and other diplomatic targets, particularly those belonging to other Arab or Muslim states, are frequent in Iraq.
A car bomb exploded near a parking lot close to the Iranian Embassy and an entrance to the Green Zone, the heavily fortified area of Baghdad that houses the Iraqi government and the US and British embassies, killing a civilian and wounding another.  The area has been targeted by car bombs in recent days: two car bombs detonated near the parking lot on this day and two more exploded the next day.  Ansar al-Sunnah claimed responsibility for this particular attack, stating that the blast targeted renegades who work at the Green Zone.
A suicide car bomber detonated his explosives outside an office of the Kurdistan Democratic Party in Tal Uskuf, a town just north of Mosul, killing at least ten people and wounding twenty others.  Attacks on political parties and government targets are frequent in Iraq.
Police report that Islamic insurgents shot and killed a 40-year-old Buddhist man in a drive-by shooting in the Muang district of Yala on Monday. After shooting him, the insurgents brutally hacked the man with a machete and left him in a rice patty near a rubber plantation. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A suicide truck bomber detonated his explosives at a police checkpoint on the outskirts of Ramadi, killing fifteen people and wounding twenty-five others. At least four police were among the fatalities.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb exploded outside the home of the Interior Minister in Baghdad.  No casualties were reported.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.
Three police officers were killed and four were injured when unidentified gunmen attacked their vehicle in Herat on April 24.  The officers were guarding a hydro-power dam when the incident occurred.
Shortly after midnight, a bomb explosion left a hole in the wall of a tax office in the centre of Ajaccio, causing injuries to an elderly lady living near the targeted building.  There have been a series of attacks preceding and following French presidential elections.
An improvised explosive device (IED) targeting police near Ghirnata Square in Kirkuk wounded at least one policeman.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb detonated near a petrol station in the Shaab district of Baghdad, killing two people and wounding eight others.  Attacks on gas stations are frequent in Iraq, as militants attempt to disrupt one of the country's most profitable industries.  Fuel stations are also frequently targeted because they attract long lines of customers waiting to purchase gas.
Police report that two men carried out a grenade attack against a group of men working on a US-funded road project in the city of Cotabato in the southern Philippines. The attack seriously injured one 28-year-old construction worker and two engineers aged 26 and 53.They were working on a road project under the auspices of the Growth in Equity in Mindanao Program.The attack occurred three days after the United States and Australia warned that possible terrorist attack could occur in the troubled region. Police have yet to identify suspects behind this attack.
An improvised explosive device (IED) injured a policeman in the Saidiyah area of Baghdad.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Militants threw grenades at a caf in Kirkuk, wounding five people.  Attacks on crowded areas are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Gunmen opened fire on the home of a security guard for Ezat Shahbandar, a member of Parliament, in Mussayab, killing three people.  Attacks on government officials and members of their staff are frequent in Iraq.
Unidentified men on a motorcycle shot dead a 70-year-old man in Pattani province in southern Thailand. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
Gunmen shot a policeman in Samarra.  Information on the victim's condition was unavailable.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed a former senior intelligence officer in Mosul.  Attacks on government targets are frequent in Iraq.
A roadside bomb detonated outside the home of Jawad Magtouf, a member of the Kut city council representing Shiite cleric Moqtada al-Sadr's bloc, killing Magtouf's twelve-year-old son and wounding nine family members.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.  This attack may have also had sectarian motivations.
Gunmen ambushed and then kidnapped the drivers of fifteen fuel trucks from a road near Samarra.  The perpetrators then set fire to their vehicles.  Attacks on the oil industry are frequent in Iraq.  Iraqi media reported the following day that eleven fuel truck drivers had been killed on the same road.
A bomb exploded inside a minibus in the al-Rabie district of southern Baghdad, killing four people and wounding four others.  Attacks on transportation networks are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
The Montesoro gendarmerie outpost in upper Corsica was bombed.  The attacked reportedly caused minor damage to the building and an electricity transformer.  There has been no claim of responsibility for this attack.There have been a series of attacks following French presidential elections.
Gunmen shot and killed Lieutenant Colonel Alaa Mahmoud Mohammed, an official at the Interior Ministry, in the al-Ghadeer neighborhood of Baghdad.  Attacks on government officials are frequent in Iraq.
An explosive device detonated in a market in the Bayya neighborhood of Baghdad, killing one person and wounding two others.  Attacks on crowded areas, particularly markets, are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Militants fired at least four mortars on the police command headquarters in Mosul.  No damage or casualties were reported.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A suicide car bomber drove his vehicle into an Interior Ministry police checkpoint in the Harthiyah neighborhood of Baghdad, killing two police and two civilians and wounding five police and five civilians.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.Note, media sources reported various targets for this attack.  The blast occurred near a tunnel in Nusour Square; some agencies stated that the tunnel, a main thoroughfare, was the target.
Two villagers were shot, their bodies subsequently being set on fire, in Pattani province in southern Thailand. The bodies of the two victims, a 30-year-old Buddhist man and his 14-year-old nephew, were found along a road. The 30 year-old-man had been beheaded. The assailants also planted two bombs targeting security forces who rushed to inspect the scene of the killings. However, a police bomb squad defused both bombs and cut mobile phone signals before they were detonated. The attacks occurred in Khok Pho district. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
Militants drove motorcycles carrying home-made bombs into a night market, parked and detonated the explosives, killing two people and injuring 24 others. The attacked occurred in Pattani province in southern Thailand. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
Two patrol police were critically wounded when insurgents detonated a bomb in the morning in Pattani province in southern Thailand. The police were on a break at a resting point in Mai Kaen district when insurgents detonated the bomb hidden there. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
Unidentified assailants torched a school in Afghanistan's Logar Province, razing thousands of textbooks, chairs, and administrative equipment.  There was word on who was behind the attacks.
An unidentified gunman shot a village head in the leg in a rural area of Yala province in southern Thailand. The attacker was riding in a pickup truck and the attack occurred while the village head was driving a motorcycle home from a monthly meeting in the Than To district office. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
A bomb explosion ripped through a food depot in the northeastern Indian city of Guwahati, severely wounding two people.  Authorities believe that the United Liberation Front of Asom (UFLA).There are about 10 militant organizations operating in Assam. The ULFA, an organization with the declared goal of achieving independence for Assam, was established in 1979.Since 1997, the Indian governments continuous military and para-military operations have considerably weakened the ULFA, driving its senior leadership into exile. However, the widening network of extortion, criminal and quasi-legal activities in Assam that the leadership commands provides for the continued financing of militant activities. (South Asia Terrorism Portal)
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a police officer and wounded three others in an assault on a district office building in Gomal District.  In addition, the building was damaged in the attack.Terrorist attacks in Afghanistan tend to be carried out by the Taliban. After being ousted from power by a US-led coalition in 2001, the Taliban has waged an insurgency against the Afghan government and NATOs International Security Assistance Force (includes US troops). However, in addition to the Taliban, other groups such as Hezb-e-Islami are also involved in the insurgency.
A 9 pound (15 kg) bomb hidden under a bridge was remotely detonated late on May 5, killing a two-year-old Muslim girl and two border patrol officers. The two adult victims were among six border patrol officers traveling on motorcycle. The attack occurred in Yala province in southern Thailand. It was one of two attacks occurring in Yala on May 5. Police suspect that Islamic insurgents are responsible for the attacks. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A suicide bomber detonated his bomb near two policemen in Zhamankay.  The attack left both police officers dead and was the second suicide bombing that killed two police officers that day in Afghanistan.  Attacks against police officers and installations are common in Afghanistan.
Militants opened fire on three Buddhist men tapping rubber trees, killing two and injuring one. The attack occurred in the morning  in Sagai Village in Thanto district in Yala province in southern Thailand. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A retired teacher was shot dead while riding a motorcycle in the Nong Chik district in Pattani province in southern Thailand. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A bomb was thrown outside of the Olimp gym on Vlade Cetkovica Street in the Serb-populated part of Kosovska Mitrovica.  No one was injured in the attack as it occurred at night, but material damage was incurred.
An unknown gunmen shot dead a hospital caretaker on the morning of May 9 in Pattani province in southern Thailand. He was shot at the Saiburi Crown Prince Hospital, where he worked. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
According to police, six insurgents in a pick-up truck fired up a police checkpoint in Rangae district in Narathiwat province in southern Thailand, killing two policemen. Police believe that the insurgents lit a kerosene container on fire and threw it into the checkpoint, forcing the policemen into the line of fire. The bodies of the two policemen who were killed were burnt. The attack occurred shortly before noon. The attack comes two days after the ambush and killing of seven Special Forces personnel in the same district. Police believe that the militants who carried out the May 11 attack also shot the Special Forces troops. They have identified three suspects and are in the process of obtaining arrest warrants. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Unidentified insurgents detonated a remote-controlled landmine in Kandahar, killing six police officers.  All six were in a vehicle when the mine was detonated, completely destroying their vehicle.  Attacks against police officers and installations are common in Afghanistan.
Militants believed to be from Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (formerly the Salafist Group for Call and Combat) detonated a homemade bomb at a police checkpoint.  The blast killed a police officer and injured two other people.  The blast came days before a national election.
The car of Omari Alilov, a North Caucasus Railway official, exploded while driving on Krasnoflotskaya street in Makhachkala.  Alilov's driver was killed, while Alilov himself and a nearby policeman received shrapnel wounds.
Islamic insurgents shot dead a couple as they were riding a motorcycle to work in Banang Sata district in Yala province in southern Thailand. Militants shot Praphan Polrak and his wife Chadakarn Polrak with M-16 assault rifles before beheading Praphan. The attack occurred at about 7 am and police found Praphan's head packed in a plastic bag in front of a school in the district at about 1pm. The new semester started on May 14 and the act was seen as a threat to teachers. The Bangkok Post reported that it was at least the 29th documented decapitation by Muslim rebels, who are believed to be copying violent acts occurring in Iraq. Also, on the same day in Yala province a couple from the same district was found shot dead in the rubber plantation where they worked.  Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Militants from Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (formerly the Salafist Group for Call and Combat) damaged the town of Timidaouen gas mains with a homemade bomb.  The explosion caused no causalities.
A powerful suicide bomb blast rocked a hotel in northwest Pakistan, killing at least twenty-five people and wounding thirty others.  According to reports, the attacker targeted the Marhaba Hotel because it was believed to harbor American spies.  In addition, authorities also believe that the blast may have been in retaliation for the killing for Taliban military commander Mullah Dadullah.  The majority of the casualties were Afghans, and there was no report of any American casualties.Suicide attacks on government, military and civilian targets have become more frequent in Pakistan. There is widespread displeasure with President Pervez Musharraf and his support for US counter-terrorism efforts.
Chamnan Chatri, assistant chief of Prachan subdistrict's administration organization, and his subordinate, Sa-aree Deemu, were shot and wounded in their car in Yarang district in southern Thailand's Pattani province. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
The Taliban beheaded a man in Kandahar's Maqur district after finding him guilty of spying for foreign forces in the country.  The Taliban has killed civilians whom it claims have helped the ISAF.
In a shooting outside Ammalit Associates, one security guard was killed and another was severely injured. The attack occurred in Singha Nakhon district in Songkhla province in southern Thailand. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Radical Islamic students who were studying at the Red Mosque kidnapped four policemen on May 18, 2007.  Authorities believe that this kidnapping may have been in response to the detention of a number of Islamic student earlier in the month.  Two of the policemen were released unharmed on May 24, 2007 without exchanging prisoners with the Islamic students.
A warehouse of a water distribution facility was burned down in Yala province in southern Thailand. Also in Yala on May 19, two men were shot dead in separate incidents. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Supected militants shot dead two men in Yala province in southern Thailand. One of the men was a police officer. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
The house of Ganassi town mayor Macapudi Baguio was attacked. Two of Macapudi's vehicles were damaged in the attack. Macapudi's brother's house in Marawi was also attacked. Ganassi town and Marawi city are located in the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao.
A backhoe driver was shot dead while he was taking a rest after lunch in Nong Chik district in Pattani province in southern Thailand. The killer, then, burned the man's body. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Taliban fighters bombed a unit of policemen en route to Lashkarargah from Sangin.  The attack, later claimed by the Taliban, left ten police officers dead.  Attacks against police officers and installations are common in Afghanistan.
25-year-old factory worker Jamlong Boontam was shot in front of his workplace. He was wounded, but he survived the attack. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A 58-year-old Muslim man was killed in Pattani province in southern Thailand late on the night of May 23. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
(Second of two attacks) Four policemen were wounded when they came under attack on their way back from examining the bodies of four individuals who had been shot and killed on May 23. The attack occurred in Yala province in southern Thailand. The policemen had gone to examine the bodies of a 56-year-old rubber tapper, his 21-year-old daughter and two sons aged 15 and 18 which were in a house on a rubber plantation.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A bomb placed inside of a shopping bag detonated at a bus station in the gas-rich town of Hub, leaving two dead and wounding two others.  No one claimed responsibility for the blast.  The Pakistani government has been fighting militants in Balochistan who demand political and economic autonomy.
A home-made bomb was thrown at an office of the Popular Party in the Valencia, causing minimal damage.  No further information is provided.
Suspected insurgents detonated a bomb at a new provincial police office in Yala province in southern Thailand. The explosion caused a nearby school to close for the day. On the same day, suspicious objects were found at several locations in the area.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A bomb blast killed six people, including four policemen, in Yahyakhel District as the district chief was inspecting a weapons cache.  In addition, four of those killed were police officers.  Attacks against police officers and installations are common in Afghanistan.
Ban Supeh school, a primary school in Riang tambon in volatile Narathiwat province, was set on fire. Local villagers were able to douse the flames and save the buildings. Arson attacks on schools are common in Thailand's southernmost provinces. A tambon is a local government unit below district government.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
(One of seven attacks) An explosion occurred at the Nai Nang restaurant in Hat Yai. The city is a popular tourist destination in southern Thailand's Songkhla province. Around the same time, bombs exploded at 6 other locations in Hat Yai, including stores, hotels, and the Thoengsia Siang Tueng Foundation. The explosions occurred within a 20 minute period of time. According to Thailand's army chief the bombs were small and there were no serious damages. He said that the bombings were most likely intended to create a disturbance rather than death and destruction. In total, one person was killed and 12 others were injured in the bombings. The secretary general of Thailand's National Security Council blamed insurgents in the south for the attacks and police detained six young men who they believe were involved. However, others believe that the bombings were not part of the insurgency, but rather were related to the impending ruling on the fate of two of Thailand's political parties.  Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
(One of seven attacks)An explosion occurred at the JB Hotel in Hat Yai. The city is a popular tourist destination in southern Thailand's Songkhla province. Around the same time, bombs exploded at 6 other locations in Hat Yai, including another hotel, stores, a restaurant and the Thoengsia Siang Tueng Foundation. The explosions occurred within a 20 minute period of time. According to Thailand's army chief the bombs were small and there were no serious damages. He said that the bombings were most likely intended to create a disturbance rather than death and destruction. In total, one person was killed and 12 others were injured in the bombings. The secretary general of Thailand's National Security Council blamed insurgents in the south for the attacks and police detained six young men who they believe were involved. However, others believe that the bombings were not part of the insurgency, but rather were related to the impending ruling on the fate of two of Thailand's political parties.   Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Militants believed to belong to the Taliban kidnapped two doctors who were en route to their jobs.  Dr. Abdur Rehman and Dr. Muhammad Ishaq were kidnapped in Lakki Marwat District when they were kidnapped by men driving a truck who resembled the Taliban.  There were no reports of any ransom demands.
A motorcycle pillion rider shot and injured two bed vendors while they were driving a pickup truck in southern Thailand's volatile Narathiwat province. The victims, Sanan Maisa, 39, and Aporn Siri, 36, were from provinces far to the north of Narathiwat. Drive-by shootings are common in Thailand's southernmost provinces. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A series of remote-triggered landmine blasts killed nine policemen on an anti-naxal operation in India's Bastar district.  The Communist Party of India (Maoists) were behind the attack.
A twenty-eight-year-old former community police volunteer in Lamai tambon, Wicha Tohka, was shot in his right knee and foot. He was returning from a soccer game on his motorcycle when he was attacked. A tambon is a local government unit below district government.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A fifty-year-old headman of Ban Krue Se village, Waesorhoh Hayeesirhoh, in volatile Pattani province was shot dead by two gunmen in a drive-by shooting. He was riding his motorcycle at the time. Drive-by shootings are common in the three southernmost provinces of Thailand. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Six laborers were injured when an unidentified militant tossed a hand grenade targeting the main railway line in Quetta.  In addition to their injuries, the attack also severely damaged the rail line.Quetta is the capital of Balochistan province, which is located in southwest Pakistan. The Pakistani government has been fighting militants in Balochistan who demand political and economic autonomy.
Unidentified gunmen riding a motorcycle shot and killed a thirty-eight-year-old rubber tapper in southern Thailand's volatile Yala province. Drive-by shootings are common in Thailand's three southernmost provinces. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A roadside bomb detonated near a police vehicle in Dehrawut, killing four police officers and wounding another one.  Attacks against police officers and installations are common in Afghanistan.
An explosive device comprised of a 5 litre can of inflammable liquid with a detonator was discovered outside an estate agent's office in Urrugne.  The detonator, reportedly, was in the form of a big firecracker but was found to not work. No one has claimed responsibility for this attempted attack.
A forty-four-year-old policeman was shot and killed at a busy market in volatile Narathiwat province in southern Thailand. Attacks on police are common in Thailand's three southernmost provinces. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Police in Iraq reported that a Turkmen politician was shot and killed.  No one has claimed responsibility for the attack.
A low powered explosive device caused minimal damage to the interior of a shopping center under construction in Ghisonaccia.  No one has claimed responsibility for this attack.
A local tribal figure, Rokan al-Jubouri, has been killed.  His body was found about 150 miles north of Baghdad in the city Sulaiman Beq.  There were signs of torture on the body.  Insurgents have stepped up attacks on local tribal sheikhs, especially those that cooperate with U.S. forces.
Suspected separatist militants set off a bomb which struck a police convoy in volatile Narathiwat province in southern Thailand. Two policemen were slightly wounded. Attacks on the police are common in the three southernmost provinces in Thailand. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A suicide car bomber killed at least ten people and wounded thirty others.  That attack took place in a busy market area in Balad Ruz, thirty miles east of Baqubah.The bomber targeted a policy convoy that was transporting prisoners.  Two police officers died in this suicide attack.
A drive by shooting in the Amil District in southwestern Baghdad  resulted in the death of Ayad Shahab Ahmed, director of the Iraqi Central Bank.  His brother was also killed.
A bomb blast at a school in southern Thailand's volatile Yala province wounded seventeen young Muslim men. The men, aged between twenty-three and thirty, were waiting to play a game of soccer when the bomb went off beside a sports field. The school is located in Yala's Bannang Sata district. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A suicide truck bomber wounded eleven people when he attacked the house of a local police brigadier general near Mosul.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
A roadside bomb detonated near a minibus, killing one person and wounding twelve others.  The device detonated in Baghdad's southern neighborhood of Zaafaraniyah.  The victims were casual workers.
Four policemen were wounded after a roadside bomb exploded.  The attack took place in the Doura district in Southern Baghdad.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
A suicide bomber killed at least nineteen people and wounded twenty-five others.  The terrorist blew up his car in a market near Falluja.   Suicide bombings are common in Iraq.
Unidentified gunmen attacked a police station, killing six people and wounding eight others.  The attack occurred in Al-Khalis City in the Diyala Governate, northeast of Baghdad.  The identity of the gunmen is still unknown.  Attacks on police and police facilities are common in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed Mehndi Hussain, the director of the provincial information ministry for Pakistan's North West Frontier Province.  The gunmen shot him as he was walking to his car en route to work.  This assassination took place amidst a spate of suicide attacks and targeted killings in these tribal regions.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed Syed Mehdi Hussain, the provincial director for information for North West Frontier Province.  The victim was killed as he was leaving his house for work.
Gunmen kidnapped Tofan Abdul Wahab, director general in the Ministry of Immigration and Refugees in the Palestine Street.  The kidnapping took place in central Baghdad. The gunmen wore military uniforms and drove sport utility vehicles typically used by Iraqi security forces.  An Interior Ministry Source confirmed the kidnapping.
A professor at the University of Adhamiya was killed while he was leaving the university.  The University of Adhamiya is in a predominantly Sunni part of East Baghdad.
A twenty-one-year-old Muslim man was shot and killed in southern Thailand's turbulent Narathiwat province. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Police intercepted a suicide bomber in Farah City.  There was no word on who or what the bomber was targeting.  Upon being ordered to stuff, the bomber detonated his explosives laden taxi cab, only killing himself.
A car bomb explosion in the Al-Talibyah area, east of Baghdad, killed three people and wounded fifteen others.  The explosion occurred near Habayibna Restaurant.  Many of the people wounded were seriously hurt, and medical personnel estimate the death toll from this attack will increase as a result.
A suicide bomber blew up a minibus.  The minibus was in line at a checkpoint to get inside Sadr City.  The U.S. military has confirmed four dead and eight wounded as a result of  the attack.  This event seems to be in keeping with recent attacks targeting Sadr City in attempts to incite sectarian violence.
A roadside bomb exploded near a senior police officer's convoy.  The incident took place near Tikrit, one hundred and ten miles north of Baghdad.  Two of the officer's bodyguards were wounded.
Guerrillas of the New People's Army (NPA) shot and killed a retired police inspector in his house in Malaybalay City on the island of Mindanao in the southern Philippines. Sources said that the victim had been helping the Philippines military in intelligence operations. The guerrillas took three rifles and several hand grenades that he had in his house. The New People's Army is a paramilitary force attempting to establish a Maoist state in the Philippines. It is the armed unit of the Communist Party of the Philippines and has been waging an insurgency against the Philippines' government since 1969.
The minaret of the Fattah Basha Mosque was destroyed by the Al-Mahdi Army militia in cooperation with the Public Order Forces.  The minaret that was destroyed was thought to be the highest minaret in Al-Bayya.
Ali al-Da'I al-Zubun was assassinated near the Bin Majid Junction in western Al-Asar City.  Al-Zubun was the chief of Al-Ashar Police Intelligence. The identify of the gunmen is unknown.   Attack on police and police facilities are common in Iraq.
(One of seven attacks)On the morning of June 8, a school was burnt down in Sai Buri district in southern Thailand's turbulent Pattani province. On the same morning, four other schools and several public health buildings were burnt down in the same district. Arson attacks on schools in Thailand's three southernmost provinces are common.  Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
(One of seven attacks)On the morning of June 8, a public health building was burnt down in Sai Buri district in southern Thailand's turbulent Pattani province. The Ban Charako public health service station was completely destroyed. On the same morning, another public health building and five schools were burnt down in the same district. Arson attacks on schools in Thailand's three southernmost provinces are common.  Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Insurgents detonated a remote-controlled bomb as a group of soldiers who were part of a teacher escort group were passing by on a patrol. Two soldiers were wounded in the blast which occurred in southern Thailand's turbulent Narathiwat province. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
The body of a policeman was found in central Diwaniya, one hundred and twelve miles south of Baghdad.  The officer had been shot.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
Unidentified assailants threw a hand grenade into the yard of Magomed Kartoyev, the head of the management department for the Federal Migration Service of Ingushetia. Several of Kartoyev's windows were broken and an awning was destroyed, but no injuries were reported.Attacks against police, officials, and ethnically non-Ingush residents continue to undermine stability in Ingushetia. Russian media generally blame the attacks on Arab jihadists. Others accuse Russian federal forces of randomly assaulting and abducting local Ingush residents in response to insurgent attacks, thereby engendering local resentment.
Gunmen with the Taliban shot and killed the brother of an employee of the country's intelligence department in Shahi Qala.  The gunmen were believed to be looking for Mohammad Yunos but upon finding him not there, they killed his brother instead.
Unknown gunmen assassinated Kayr al-Din Sabir, director of the Iraqi Central Bank in the Ninawa Governorate, north of Baghdad.  Two of his escorts were also killed.  The assassination took place while Mr. Sabir was on his way to work.
Several roadside bombs just east of Tikrit detonated, killing three policemen and injuring a dozens others.  The bombs were planted around the Highway Roads Police Department in al-Alam town in the Sunni-dominated Salahudin province.  Several police vehicles were severely damaged in the blast.  Attacks targeting police and police facilities are common in Iraq.
Two suicide bombers detonated their two booby-trapped cars at gas stations in Al-Bayya and Al-Saydiyah neighborhoods, killing two people and wounding fourteen others.  In the Al-Bayya attack, the suicide bomber rammed his car into a line of cars waiting in front of a gas station, killing a civilian and wounding six others.A few minutes later, In the second explosion, the bomber also targeted a line waiting outside a gas station.  The explosions set fire to many civilian cars.
Taliban forces destroyed a police vehicle in a rocket attack in Farah province.  While the group claimed to have  killed thirteen policemen in addition to blowing up the vehicle, a police spokesperson dismissed the claim as baseless.  Attacks on police forces are common in Afghanistan.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police station, killing two policemen and wounding three others.  The incident occurred in Samarra, sixty miles north of Baghdad.  Attacks on police are common in iraq.
Two unidentified gunmen shot and killed two teachers in turbulent Narathiwat province in southern Thailand. The assailant shot twenty-six-year-old Yupha Sengwat and forty-two-year-old Thipaporn Thansopha at point-blank range while they were eating lunch. Attacks on teachers and schools are common in the three southernmost provinces of Thailand, of which Narathiwat is one. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A drive-by shooting left a police officer dead.  The officer was on his way home, near Hawja, seventy miles southwest of Kirkuk.
Gunmen set a police vehicle on fire and killed three policemen.  The incident took place in Baghdad.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
Unidentified men shot and killed Oswald Villamor, who was elected as councilor of the northern town of Lagangilang, while he was riding his motorcycle. 130 people were killed in the Philippines during the three months leading up to and immediately after local elections which were held in mid-May.
Armed men blew up a mosque in the Al-Iskandariyah sub-district in Babil Governorate, south of Baghdad.  The Mosque was completely obliterated.  It is unclear how many people died or were wounded in the attack.
A bomb detonated, blowing up a bridge connecting a city southwest of  Kirkut to Tikri.  Tikrit is about a hundred miles north of Baghdad.No casualties were reported, however the bridge was very important.  Attacks on bridges are becoming increasingly common in Iraq.
A thirty-eight-year-old man was shot several times in southern Thailand's turbulent Yala province. Isma-ae Radeng was injured when assailants shot him several times as he was washing before prayers at his home in Yala's Kabang district. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
At least five people were killed when a hand-thrown explosive was tossed into a cinema hall in Baidoa.  More than one hundred and fifty people were patronizing the cinema at the time of the explosion.  It is believed that this is incident is the first of its kind in the city.Since routing the Union of Islamic Courts in December in 2006, both Ethiopia and Somalia's transitional government have been combating a fierce insurgency campaign.
Unidentified gunmen attacked and burned three Sunni Muslim mosques south of Baghdad.  The attack took place in Iskandariya, twenty five miles south of Baghdad.  Iskandariya is a mixed Sunni-Shiite city.  Two of the mosques were demolished and an explosion brought down the minaret of the third, main mosque.
A bomb exploded at a soccer field in southern Thailand's turbulent Pattani province, injuring fourteen policemen providing security at a friendly soccer game between local teams. Police say that the bomb was detonated by cell phone. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Unidentified militants bombed a music store in Charsadda a few weeks after a note signed by the Taliban threatened the shop and demanded that it close.  At least twenty-two music shops have been bombed in the area.  One hundred other shops have closed.
A suicide bomber attacked a group of policemen in Nad-e Ali district in Helmand province.  The attack left one policeman dead and two others wounded.  Attacks on police forces are common in Afghanistan.
Terrorists attacked the Talah bin-Ubaydallah Mosque in Al-Zubayr district in southeastern Iraq.  Attacks on mosques are common in Iraq.
A Buddhist man was shot and killed by insurgents at a tea house in southern Thailand's turbulent Pattani province.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Unidentified gunmen fired on a village teashop in southern Thailand's turbulent Yala province, injuring five Muslim men. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Haqqi Isma'il, an employee of the Al-Jaza'ir Mosque, was assassinated while driving his car.  Attacks on civilians and religious institutions are common in Iraq.
Gunmen attacked a convoy of police, killing eight policemen. Different sources report different numbers of victims killed and/or wounded.  The incident took place in Mishahda, a town north of Baghdad.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
A contingent of Taliban fighters assaulted a police post on the border with Iran, killing two policemen.  The attack, which took place at the Qalat-i-Nazar Khan border post in Herat, left eight Taliban dead.
A suicide bomber rammed his car into a Samarra school. The school was  housing police officers, killing four people.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.  Attacks on civilians are also common in Iraq.
A car bomb in a popular market in Falluja killed three people and wounded fifteen others.  The area is a Sunni Arab stronghold, fifty kilometers west of Baghdad.
Unidentified gunmen attacked an electric power transmission tower in Kirkuk.  The tower transmits power from western stations to the city center.  The terrorists used explosives and detonated them near the Kirkuk-Dibs road near the village of Maysalun.  Consequently, the tower collapsed.
A school was set on fire in southern Thailand's turbulent Narathiwat province. The fire destroyed one of the school's buildings. Arson attacks on schools are common in Thailand's three southernmost provinces, of which Narathiwat is one. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Several molotov cocktails, which did not explode, were thrown at the headquarters of the national employment center in the town of Tudela.  Basque separatists have been perpetrating various attacks before regional assembly elections in Navarra.
The Green Zone in Baghdad came under attack.  Rockets landed in the Green Zone according to several sources.  On June 20, a forum participant posted to a jihadist website, claiming responsibility for the attacks.  He/she claimed that Reformation and Jihad Front sent three Tariq rockets to the Green Zone/International Zone, a region containing the U.S. embassy.
(One of three attacks)Chaithat Raksayot, police chief of Mai Kaen district of Pattani province, a senior officer of the district's Internal Security Operations Command and a security volunteer were going to investigate arson attacks on two schools in the turbulent province, when their vehicle hit a roadside bomb. The three were injured in the attack and were taken a hospital where they died. The arson attacks had occurred the previous night. Arson attacks on schools are common in Thailand's three southernmost provinces, of which Pattani is one.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A small explosive device was thrown into a house in Palu city in Central Sulawesi province in Indonesia. The device exploded, but there were no casualties reported. Police claimed that the explosion was intended to terrorize the residents.
A suicide car bomber detonated, killing five policemen and wounding thirteen others.  The attack occurred in Ramadi, sixty-eight miles west of Baghdad.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
A Sunni mosque in Jebla was attacked. Jebla is forty kilometers north of Hilla.  The mosque was attacked in the same way two other mosques were attacked earlier in the day.  Attacks on religious institutions are common in Iraq.
A couple was shot in southern Thailand's turbulent Yala province. The husband was killed and the wife was in serious condition. Both were traveling vendors. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
The Green Zone, which contains the American embassy, had several mortar shells land in int.  Smoke was seen in the region, which houses several Iraqi government institutions and other embassies as well.  Not much information is known about this attack.
Unknown attackers opened fire on a vehicle carrying Yuri Ivashov, a senior prosecutor with the Russian Prosecutor General's Office in Nazran, Ingushetia. Ivashov represents the state at the Ingush Supreme Court in cases involving terrorism, banditry, and murders targeting law enforcement. He was wounded in the left shoulder during the attack.Attacks against police, officials, and ethnically non-Ingush residents continue to undermine stability in Ingushetia. Russian media generally blame the attacks on Arab jihadists. Others accuse Russian federal forces of randomly assaulting and abducting local Ingush residents in response to insurgent attacks, thereby engendering local resentment.
Terrorists killed a police officer and wounded two of his bodyguards.  The attack occurred on a road between Najaf and the nearby town of Kufa.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
(One of five attacks)Insurgents set fire to power poles and rubber tiles at many locations in Muang district in southern Thailand's troubled Yala province on the night of June 22. Elsewhere in Yala, a school in Raman district was set on fire. Two buildings were damaged. Insurgents also opened fire on a teashop using assault rifles. The same night also saw arson attacks on five schools in neighboring Songkhla province. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed two policeman in Afghanistan's troubled Kandahar Province.  Attacks on police forces are common in Afghanistan.
A police officer and his wife died at the hands of gunmen after a drive-by shooting occurred.  The attack took place in Kufa, about a one hundred miles south of Baghdad. Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
Unidentified terrorists killed a police officer in Al-Najaf. Al-Najaf is south of Baghdad. Two of the police officers escorts were also wounded.
Villagers discovered the decapitated body of an Afghan refugee purported to be a U.S. spy.  His body had a note alleging that he worked for the U.S. and that anyone else caught doing the same would be killed in similar fashion.
Unidentified gunmen killed the teenage son of Sangin District police chief Gholam Wali after kidnapping him on June 23, 2008.
Gunmen killed an Iraqi translator during a drive-by shooting.  The attack occurred in Suwayra, about twenty-five miles south of Baghdad.
Gunmen killed a 35-year old Iraqi journalist.  The journalist was on her way home from work in Mosul.  She is the second female journalist to be killed in Mosul in June 2007.
Two anti-tank F-1 hand grenades were thrown into a caf in the village of Ordzhonikidzevskaya in Ingushetia early on the morning of June 24. The caf itself was damaged but no injuries were reported.No suspects have been identified, but security agencies noted a standing order issued by the current amir of the Caucasus Front Magas to Ingush militants that amusement arcades are to be targeted for bombings. Typically these attacks are carried out by groups of teenage Ingush militants.Attacks against police, officials, and ethnically non-Ingush residents continue to undermine stability in Ingushetia. Russian media generally attribute the attacks to Arab jihadists. Others accuse Russian federal forces of randomly assaulting and abducting local Ingush residents in response to insurgent attacks, thereby engendering local resentment.
The same man who attacked two villagers in southern Thailand's turbulent Narathiwat province tried to set a house on fire. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A suicide bomber detonated inside a car.  The car was near a governors office when it exploded.  As a result of the attack, eight people died and thirty one were wounded.  Hilla is sixty miles south of Baghdad.
A suicide bomber detonated, killing eighteen people and wounding fifty others.  The attack occurred as the bomber was driving a fuel truck outside a Baiji police station.  Baiji is one hundred and twenty-five miles north of Baghdad.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
Insurgents attempted to sabotage a railway by removing nuts and bolts from the track in southern Thailand's turbulent Pattani province. Police found the damage. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Gunmen shot and killed a village chief and his wife in an attack on their pickup truck in southern Thailand's turbulent Yala province. The chief's daughter and one-year-old niece were injured. The attackers came up behind the pickup truck on a motorbike. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Insurgents kidnapped a politician in India's Assam region.  In addition, insurgents shot and killed two politicians in India's Assam region.  All three politicians were part of India's ruling Congress party. Police suspect Dima Halam Daoga(DHD).  They are one of about ten militant organizations operating in Assam.
Gunmen killed a member of the Al-Latifayah Municipality Council.  The terrorists were unidentified.  Attacks on city officials are common in Iraq.
One person was killed and another four were injured in a drive-by shooting at a tea shop in southern Thailand's Pattani province. All five victims were customers. Drive-by shootings are common in Thailand's three southernmost provinces. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Gunmen killed two members of the Assyrian's Beth-Nahrain Association Union.  The attack occurred in central Mosul, two hundred and forty miles north of Baghdad.
Terrorists planted bombs in an athletic club in Mosul.  When the bombs detonated, the club was badly damaged.  The attacks occurred in the evening.  No casualties were reported.
Three bombs exploded almost simultaneously, targeting three grocery stores in Narathiwat city, the provincial seat of turbulent Narathiwat province in southern Thailand. Police suspect that the attacks were coordinated because at each location the bomb was built into a milk carton and placed on a shelf. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Unidentified individuals set fire to a thirteen-year-old cooperative belonging to a local women's group. The group had a membership of seventy-five and generated regular income for about 600 local residents. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A  bomb planted inside a pickup truck  killed twenty-five people and injured fifty.  The explosion occurred at an intersection where buses pick up and drop off passengers  in the Shi'ite area of southern Baghdad.  Attacks on buses are common in Iraq.
Police found the body of a university lecturer beside a river in Kut, about one hundred miles southeast of Baghdad.  The lecturer was kidnapped a day before his body was discovered.  Attacks on educational institutions and figures are common in Iraq.
An improvised explosive device described as a gas canister linked to a triggering device was discovered outside a branch of Credit Agricole.  Authorities defused the device after being alerted by a resident of Saint Palais.
Eleven people died and seven others were kidnapped after terrorists posing as Interior Ministry commandoes, and using its cars, attacked houses in the Al-Sittin street in central Darwah.  They terrorists shot the dwellers of those houses and among the victims of the attack, was a Mukhtar (prominent local figure) of the area.  His name was Majid Ahmad al-Jubur.  His two sons and ten people from other families (including three children, two women, and five men) were also victims.
An Afghan interpreter was found beheaded in eastern Afghanistan's restive province of Paktia.  According to reports, Mir Zaman had been kidnapped several days ago.  The Taliban have repeatedly threatened to kill those who collaborate with Western forces.
Unidentified insurgents bombed three CD shops in the markets of the Mattani Bazaar. The attack completely destroyed all three shops. It was the fourth attack on CD shops in the city.
A suicide bomber disguised as a police officer killed six people when he detonated outside a police recruitment center.  The incident occurred in Muqdadiya, fifty miles northeast of Baghdad. Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
An armed group kidnapped Naser Ali, director of the Detainees Affairs Department at Basra Governorate Police Command in southern Iraq.  The kidnapping occurred while Mr. Ali was near the old Passports Department of the Al-Jaza'ir neighborhood in central Basra.  The terrorists took Mr. Ali to an unknown location.
An office of the Bareh Tai tambon administration organization was set on fire in southern Thailand's turbulent Narathiwat province. Police said that five masked gunmen broke into the office and held a security guard at gunpoint before pouring gasoline on office equipment and setting the office on fire. Note: A tambon is a local government unit below district government.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Armed insurgents with Taliban shot and killed one policeman and wounded four others while they were offering morning prayers in Waigal District.  Attacks on police forces are common in Afghanistan.
A suicide car bomber targeting a police station killed five cops.  Fourteen others were wounded.  The attack occurred in Ramadi, sixty-eight miles west of Baghdad.  Attacks on police and suicide bombings are both common in Iraq.
A car bomb killed one civilian and wounded three others.  The explosion took place at the entrance of the al-Rashid vegetable market in the Doura district in southern Baghdad.
A school was set on fire in southern Thailand's turbulent Narathiwat province. Witnesses said around five teenagers on motorcycles carried plastic containers of gasoline to the school shortly before it was set alight. Arson attacks on schools are common in Thailand's three southernmost provinces, of which Narathiwat is one. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A suicide bomber killed one policeman and wounded at least twelve others at the center Wardag Province.  The attacker was accompanied by another attacker who was found in wounded condition.
A car bomb parked near a market in Baghdad killed nine people and wounded thirty-three others.  The explosion occurred in the religiously mixed district of Binoon.
A roadside bomb killed a policeman, wounded four people, and caused property damage when it exploded in Mosul.  Among the injured were two policemen.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a senior education official in Khost province.  The Taliban denied any role in the attack.
On July 3, 2007 a car bomb found outside a mosque in Glasgow was defused.  Authorities believe that this car bomb at the Fourth Street Mosque is unrelated to the terror investigation of recent attacks in Scotland and London.
A roadside bomb exploded at Al-Qadisiya intersection, injuring two people.  The bomb was targeting the man who guards the head of Kirkuk directorate (lieutenant Adel Anwar).
A car bomb killed two civilians and wounded nineteen others (including seven policemen).  Terrorists targeted a police convoy in central Kirkuk.  Terrorists placed the car bomb near the As-Asdiqa petrol station in al-Wasiti.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
A suicide car bomb killed four civilians and ten others.  The bomb was meant to kill Sheik Kamel Mahommed al-Essawi, a prominent tribal leaderin Falluja.  Mr. al-Essawi opposes Al Qaeda in Iraq.
Unidentified gunmen shot dead Khavazh Daurbekov, the deputy head of administration of the Pliyevskiy municipal district in Nazran. The attackers fired on Daurbekov with automatic weapons through the window of a vehicle and sped off. No suspects have been identified.
A bomb exploded at a school in southern Thailand's turbulent Narathiwat province, injuring five policemen. Attacks on schools are common in Thailand's three southernmost provinces, of which Narathiwat is one. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A shop owner was seriously injured by gunmen in southern Thailand's turbulent Narathiwat province. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Four policemen were killed and two were wounded because of a roadside bomb in Samarra. Samarra is sixty-two miles north of Baghdad.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
The body of a former Iraqi Army officer was found.  The discovery was in Iskandariya.  Attacks on military officials are common in Iraq.
Insurgents removed fifty-six nuts and bolts from sleeper trains between stations in southern Thailand's turbulent Yala and Pattani provinces. Trains had to stop for safety reasons. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Insurgents with the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) planted a bomb on an auto rickshaw in Guwahti and detonated as it was running.  The ensuing blast wounded five people, including the rickshaw driver.  Police indicated that the ULFA was behind the attack.
An IED explosion in the Zafaraniyah district south east of Baghdad injured three policemen. Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
A car bomb blew up outside a photo studio, killing eighteen members of a wedding party and wounding twenty-nine others.  Most of the victims were women.  The explosion took place in Abu Dshir, a Shiite Muslim district that adjoins the mainly Sunni neighborhood of Dora in south Baghdad.
A Muslim rubber tapper was shot and killed in southern Thailand's turbulent Narathiwat province. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A Buddhist woman was shot and killed at her grocery shop by two suspected insurgents posing as customers. The attack occurred in southern Thailand's turbulent Pattani province. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed four policemen in Pakistan's northwestern city of Peshawar.  The attack also left one policeman wounded.  Although it was not clear who was behind the attack, the Taliban have recently bombed a series of music shops in the area.
A roadside bomb targeting police patrol detonated, injuring two policemen.  The attack occurred in downtown Kirkuk.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
A car bomb killed seventeen people and wounded twenty-five others.  A suicide bomber detonated the vehicle near a caf in Sadiyah, 100 miles northeast of Baghdad, killing all the members of one  family.  The caf was in a Shi'ite neighborhood.
A remote-detonated improvised explosive device killed three workers who returning home from constructing a bridge between Moqor and Katawaz District in Paktika.  The attack took place in Ghazni province.  Attacks on those engaging in reconstruction projects in Afghanistan are common.
A suicide car bomber attacked Shi'ite Kurds in Garghoush, a village near the Iranian border.  Twenty-two people died and seventeen were wounded.
The body of a kidnapped intelligence official was discovered in Qorghal village in Alasai District.  It is believed that the Taliban was behind the attack as the intelligence official accused a local Taliban commander of having killed.
A suicide truck bomber detonated near Haswa, thirty miles south of Baghdad.  As a result, twenty-three new Iraqi army recruits died and twenty-seven were wounded.  Attacks on the Iraqi army are common in Iraq.
Unidentified terrorists assassinated two members of the Municipal Council in the Mosul District in Ninawa Governorate, north of Baghdad.  The attack took place in the Al-Rifa'l neighborhood of western Mosul.  After the gunmen fired their initial shots, Khalaf Jazza and Ibrahim Muhammad Umar died immediately.
Islamist gunmen shot and killed three Chinese nationals and wounded another in an attack in their home on the outskirts of Peshwar, a city in northwest Pakistan.  Authorities believe that the attack took place in response to the siege of the Red Mosque in Islamabad.  The men had been living in the area for three years and had a successful business building rickshaws.  There was no looting following the killing.
Two roadside bombs exploded, killing four people and wounding twenty-one.  Reuters reports the attack occurring near a bus station while Al-Sharqiyah reports the attack occurred near a police station.  There is also some uncertainty with regards to casualties.
Two oil workers--one a British national and one a Bulgarian national--were kidnapped in Nigeria's Delta Region on July 9th.  The two were later released on August 8th.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a policeman and wounded three others in an attack on a police station near Khattak Khel Mandan.  Attacks on police forces are common in the volatile area of northwestern Pakistan.
At least four policemen were killed and two others were wounded when gunmen attacked their patrol in northern Baghdad.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
A car bomb detonated near a police station in Al-Khadhra in southwestern Baghdad.  As a result, two people were wounded.  Attacks on police and police facilities are common in Iraq.
A suicide bomber used a bicycle to infiltrate a space between two police trucks and detonated.  As a result, one police officer was wounded and the window of one police vehicle was damaged.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq, this one took place in Fallujah.
A Buddhist staff member of the provincial hydrology center was shot and killed in southern Thailand's turbulent Yala province. Police said that two gunmen approached him from behind on a motorcycle and fired at him. Drive-by shootings are common in Thailand's three southernmost provinces of Pattani, Yala and Narathiwat.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed two loyal influential tribesmen in South Waziristan.  Both were kidnapped a few days ago, but their bodies were discovered on July 10, 2007.  Thus far, no one has claimed responsibility for the attack.
Members of the FARC shot to death two local council members, Argemiro Medina and Ofelia Betancur, marking the 5th and 6th slayings of local politicians this year. The killings are part of the so-called Plan Pistola, associated with forcing extortion from public officials and linked with drug smuggling.
Gunmen locked eleven people inside a house.  The terrorists subsequently killed them .  The attack occurred in Garma, west of Baghdad.  The house was blown up afterwards.
American troops delivered the body of Aqeel Abdul Ameer, a policeman, to Tikrit general hospital.  Mr. Ameer used to live in one of the villages of Al Shurqat.  The circumstances around his death remain unclear, although terrorism is likely at play.
Multiple suicide bombers detonated at the house of Sheikh Meshnin al-Khalaf,  a Sunni tribal leader, near Falluja, killing twenty-one people and wounding fifty others.  There was a gathering of the al-Jumailat tribe  at the house when the attack occurred.  After the initial explosions, people tried to evacuate.  During this time, two more suicide bombers detonated.  The attack is thought to be clearly linked to terrorism since Khalaf was calling a gathering to urge his tribesmen to join the Iraqi security forces in order to fight al-Qaeda.
A Muslim man was shot and killed at his rubber plantation in southern Thailand's turbulent Narathiwat province. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Unidentified gunmen attacked a police checkpoint in Nangarhar.  There were no reports of any casualties or injuries, and the police repelled the attack.  Attacks on police forces are common in Afghanistan.
A suicide bomber detonated at a wedding ceremony for Police Chief Brig. Gen. Ibrahim Jubouri.  As a result, four people died and ten were wounded.  The attack occurred in Tal Afar, 260 miles northwest of Baghdad.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
A villager was shot and killed by suspected insurgents in southern Thailand's turbulent Narathiwat province. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Taliban militiamen decapitated Lal Pohan, a man accused of working for Afghan and coalition forces, in Andar District.  Attacks on those who work with the Afghan government and the coalition forces are common in Afghanistan.
A bomb that was planted at the Mother Child Health Centre in Landi Kotal detonated, destroying the gate of the hospital.  However, there was no loss of life.  There was also no word on who was behind the attack.
A roadside bomb in Mosul detonated.  As a result, one policeman was killed, eight officers were wounded, and a civilian was wounded.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
A bomb attack at a house in southern Thailand's turbulent Pattani province seriously injured three men and a one-year-old child. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A suicide bomber blew up a political agent's office in North Waziristan Agency's Miramshah area.  The attack left four people dead and three others injured.  Political agent Pirzada Khan, who may have been the target of the attack of the attack, escaped unscathed.
A policeman was killed in a drive by shooting in front of his home.  The attack occurred in Kut.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
An explosives laced car detonated near a gas station in the Al-Mishin complex in southern Baghdad.  As a result, two civilians died and fifteen were wounded.  The car was situated near the main street leading to the Al-Rashid camp.  The wounded were evacuated to nearby hospitals.
The British Embassy in Santiago was bombed at 10:15 Sunday night, causing minor damage to the embassy and the remainder of the building, which houses the ChileTabacos firm. There were no injuries reported. The Leon Czolgoz Autonomous and Destructive Forces, a small anarchist group, claimed responsibility two days later, stating that the act was a sign of solidarity with the people of Iraq and Afghanistan.
Gunmen killed the family members of the mayor of Aziziyah (Hasan Jasmim), a predominantly Shi'ite town  thirty-five miles southeast of Baghdad.  The mayor's wife and eight year old son were killed.
A member of the Kurdish forces (Beshmarga) was killed.  Four terrorists attacked the office of the general secretary of the PUK party.  PUK is one of the two main Kurdish parties.  The attack occurred on the Al Tabaqchali b ridge in downtown Kirkuk.
  Unidentified gunmen targeted and killed an Iraqi police lieutenant.  The police officer got shot and killed shortly after the end of his workday.
A remote-detonated improvised explosive device wounded eight policemen in Greshk district in Helmand province.  The Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack.  Attacks on police forces are common in Afghanistan.
A suicide car bomb near a police checkpoint killed four policemen and a civilian.  In addition, twenty other people were wounded.  The attack occurred at the checkpoint in al-Harthiya in western Baghdad.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
Unidentified attackers opened fire on several homes in Barsuki, the native village of Ingush President Murat Zyazikov. Zyazikov's own home was attacked, as well as the residences of several of his relatives, including Zyazikov's uncle and his  son, who is the head of President Zyazikov's bodyguard detail. The home of the head of the Ingush presidential guard, Ruslanbek Zyazikov, as well as the courtyard of a neighboring home, were also hit by grenades. No injuries were reported and no suspects have been identified.
Four suspected insurgents shot and injured a policeman in southern Thailand's turbulent Yala province. Attacks on the police are common in Thailand's three southernmost provinces, of which Yala is one.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A school was set on fire on the night of July 16 in Khok Pho district in southern Thailand's turbulent Pattani province. Another school in the same district was also set on fire on that night. Arson attacks on schools are common in Thailand's three southernmost provinces of Pattani, Yala and Narathiwat.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A bomb killed one policemen and wounded four other people in Yusufiya.  Yusufiya is twenty miles south of Baghdad.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
Terrorists killed Judge Hamdi Habeeb al-Jubori, an Iraqi judge, at a fake checkpoint near Balad, fifty-three miles north of Baghdad.
(The second of two attacks)Four members of a bomb disposal team were injured when a bomb exploded in southern Thailand's turbulent Yala province. The team was investigating the explosion of a bomb hidden in the basket of a motorcycle, when another bomb, which had been hidden inside the same motorcycle, was remotely detonated. One of the members of the team died in the hospital. Fourteen other people, including reporters and bystanders, were injured by the explosion. The attack occurred in Yala city, the capital of Yala province. Attacks on police are common in Thailand's three southernmost provinces of Pattani, Yala and Narathiwat. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Gunmen attacked Waheda Abd Al Muhsan, a member of the Salhuddin governorate council.  The terrorists attacked her convoy en route  to Tikrit.  It is unclear, according to news, whether she is alive or dead.
A sniper killed a policeman.  The homicide occurred on a highway near the Al Nahdha bus station, close to the entrance of the Iraqi ministry of the interior.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
A policeman got shot in the leg by a sniper.  The policeman was guarding a checkpoint in central Fallujah when he was attacked.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
Several terrorists entered the one-story office of the Mihrab Martyr Institute for Islamic Teaching in Kut, one hundred miles southeast of Baghdad, and detonated bombs they planted inside the building after handcuffing the guards.  The explosions left the building in a pile of rubble.  The guards in the building, it is unclear how many of them there were, died and two passers-by were wounded as well.  The Institute is a charity arm of the Supreme Islamic Council of Iraq and is led by Abdul-Aziz Al-Hakim (who also heads the Shiite bloc in parliament).  Sources say the attack is related to a rivalry between Shiite groups.
Armed men suspected to be members of th Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG) killed a Muslim missionary in the city of Lamitan in the southern Philippines (Basilan province). Philippines Marines 1st Marine Brigade commander Colonel Ramiro Alivio said the victim had been an informant for the military about the ASG's illegal activities. The victim's body was cut up and placed in a sack. Note: The victim's body was found in Balagatasan village.
A suicide bomber targeted a group of policemen in Khost, blowing himself up, killing three policemen and one civilian.  Attacks on police forces are common in Afghanistan.
An aid worker was wounded when their car was rocked by a remote-detonated roadside bomb.  The attack left the worker wounded.
Terrorists launched a mortar shell into the Green Zone.  No casualty was reported.  The Green Zone, also called the International Zone, is the region of Baghdad which contains the U.S. embassy.
Insurgents detonated a bomb at a school in southern Thailand's turbulent Pattani province, injuring a soldier who was part of a unit protecting teachers. The blast occurred prior to a visit to the province by Thailand's army chief, during which he was scheduled to meet with provincial governors to discuss security measures.  Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Local residents found the body of an individual who had been shot and killed. The body was found in southern Thailand's turbulent Yala province. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Unidentified militants blew up a barber shop in Bajaur.  The blast took place during the night, when the shop was closed.  Thus, there was no loss of life reported.
Nine railroad cars were derailed when al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb launched an attack against a fuel freight train.  Ultimately, this attack damaged roughly thirty meters of railroad track and injured one soldier.  The attack occurred 15 kilometers southeast of Boumerdes.
A roadside bomb wounded one Iraqi policeman when it detonated.  The explosion occurred in the Mansour district of west Baghdad.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
Two armed gunmen shot at Mawlawi Aslam, the head of the Balkh Religious Scholars Council.  According to write-up, Aslam survived the attack.  Those behind the incident were later arrested.  They were from Faizabad District of Jowzjan Province.
A body found near a road close to Koba village detonated, killing two police officers and wounding two others.  The attack took place in Kirkuk.  Attacks on police officers are common throughout Iraq.
Terrorists killed a policeman and a civilian in a caf in Mosul.  The attack occurred while the victims were watching the Iraqi soccer team beat Vietnam in the Asian Cup quarter-final on television.  Attacks on police in civilian settings are common in Iraq.
Vakha Vedzizhev, the imam of the Barsukinskiy mosque and a well-known religious figure in Ingushetia, was shot and killed with a Kalashnikov rifle by unknown gunmen. Vedzizhev and his wife were forced to pull over to the side of the road and step out of their car while traveling  to Karabulak. He was then shot several times; his wife was not harmed.Vedzizhev was a chief specialist for the Ingush Ministry for Public and International Relations. He was also a former advisor to the president of Ingushetia for religious matters.
A parked motorcycle bomb detonated.  As a result, two civilians were killed and twenty were injured.  The explosion occurred at the Al Kulfaa square in Baghdad.
A suicide bomber driving a minivan laced with a half ton of explosives detonated, killing five Sunni tribal leaders and wounding twelve others. The attack took place in Taju.  The tribal leaders were opposed to Al-Qaeda and were organizing a Taji Tribes Awakening Council, a partnership between tribal leaders and U.S. and Iraqi Security Forces.
Gunmen killed a policeman in Iskandariya.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
Tribal members of a peace committee escaped a rocket attack in North Waziristan a rocket slammed down a girls' hostel that the group had been using for its meetings.  The group had previously been in contact with the Taliban in pursuit of a peace accord.
Gunmen with the Taliban shot and killed the director of the crime department in Herat.  Attacks on police forces are common in Afghanistan.
A parked car bomb explosion near a restaurant in downtown Baghdad killed four civilians and wounded six others.  No suspects were arrested.  The restaurant, Seerwan, is one of Baghdad's most popular kebab restaurants.
Two car bombs exploded simultaneously, killing at least ten people and wounding thirty-eight.  Among the dead, are three policemen.  The explosions occurred in Baghdad's central Karrada district.  At least twenty cars were set on fire because of the explosions.  Karrada is a largely Shiite neighborhood and normally considered very safe since it is close to the Green Zone.
Unidentified men shot a man in southern Thailand's turbulent Yala province. The victim was taken to a hospital. His condition was serious. The attackers were riding in a pick-up truck. Drive-by shootings are common in Thailand's three southernmost provinces of Pattani, Yala and Narathiwat.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
An IED targeted Iraqi police patrol in Zayuna.  As a result of the attack, two policemen were injured and one police vehicle was damaged.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
A suicide truck bomb exploded in front of a children's hospital in Hilla.  As a result of the attack, twenty-seven were killed and sixty-eight were injured.  The hospital building was considerably damaged and at least ten cars were damaged.  The suicide bomber detoanted right in front of the main door of the hospital.  Most of the victims were women and children.  The motivation for targetting a children's hospital is unclear.
On the evening of the Tour De France cycle race, an uninhabited house located in Licq-Atherey was severely damaged by an incendiary device.  Slogans in French such as The Basque country is not for sale were found on it.  No further information is provided.
Terrorists killed thirty civilians and wounded at least seventy-five when their suicide car bomb detonated.  The attack took place in downtown Baghdad while the civilians were celebrating the Iraqi national soccer team victory in Al Rowad square in a Mansour neighborhood.It is believed that Sunni militants were responsible for the attack.  It is also believed that the attacks did not target a particular sect, but were conducted  to garner attention for the militants.
Adnan Al-Safi, an Iraqi journalist, was shot on his way to work.  He remained in a coma for two days before dying.  Al-Safi was chairman of the Islamic Journalism Society and correspondent for the Anwaar satellite channel.
Gunmen with purportedly with the Taliban shot and killed a man working as an interpreter for coalition forces.  Attacks on those who work alongside coalition forces are common in Afghanistan.
Two civilians died and eighteen were injured when terrorists detonated a roadside bomb near a bus.  The attack occurred on a bus in Fallujah city center near the education department.
A roadside bomb in centrak Kirkuk injured one policeman.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
Terrorists attacked Mosul's main soccer stadium.  They destroyed half of the 10,000 seat structure.  It is unclear what the motivation for the attack was.
Dagestani deputy mufti Kurbangomed Ramazanov was killed in the capital city of Makhachkala by a special operational group called Yasin. The group was founded to destroy hypocrites and the ideological enemies of Islam, according to a statement by Jamaat Shariat, a militant Islamist organization in Dagestan.Ramazanov was a senior cleric in Russia's southern region of Dagestan.
Six people, including four policemen, were injured when a roadside bomb rocked a prisoner van passing through Peshawar.  It was not immediately clear who was behind the attack.
An explosion took place on the road that leads to the three Albanian villages of Koshtove, Ceraje, and Bistrica. Regional police in Mitrovice have concluded that the explosion was a terrorist act that presents a threat to general security.The blast caused minor damage, but no injuries were reported. No arrests have been made, nor have any suspects been identified.
A sniper at Al-Hadra neighborhood killed a policeman in Anbar.  The attack occurred near a police checkpoint.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
In a statement posted on its website, Jamaat Shariat has claimed that a mojahedin group has abducted an aid to the prosecutor in the town of Buynaksk, Dagestan. According to the statement, the fate of the official, Magomed Batdalov, will be decided by the Jamaat Shariat's own court.
Taliban gunmen shot and killed four policemen in Charkh District in Logar province.  Six gunmen on motorbikes attacked the policeman's vehicle.  Attacks on police forces are common in Afghanistan.
Gunmen killed a policeman in Kut.  Kut is one hundred miles south of Baghdad. Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
A former separatist, who turned himself in to police two years ago, was killed by suspected insurgents in a drive-by shooting in southern Thailand's turbulent Narathiwat province. According to police, at least five men on a pick-up truck shot him and fled the scence. Drive-by shootings are common in Thailand's three southernmost provinces of Pattani, Yala and Narathiwat.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Taliban gunmen shot and killed two policemen in Kajaki.  The group later claimed responsibility for the incident.  Attacks on police forces are common in Afghanistan.
A teacher shopping in the Hawija market died after gunmen shot him.  The teacher  was from Tareeq Baghdad neighborhood.
A female official for the Kurdistan Democratic Party died after terrorists shot her.  Her party is pressing for oil-rich Kirkuk to be incorporated into the autonomous Kurdish region.  Many Arabs and Turkomen oppose this idea.
Taliban gunmen shot and killed two policemen and wounded six others in an ambush against them in Andar District.  The group claimed that all of the policemen were killed.  Attacks on police forces are common in Afghanistan.
One policeman died and two were wounded after a fight with terrorists.  The terrorists had machine guns and began firing on police in the  Al Bayaa area of Baghdad.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
Gunmen with the Taliban ambushed a police checkpoint in Maiwand.  However, there were no casualties in the incident.  The police repelled the attack.  Attacks on police forces are common in Afghanistan.
Twenty people were killed and forty were wounded when a suicide car bomb detonated near Al Hurriyah square in the Karrada neighborhood in downtown Baghdad.  The bomb exploded close to the Al Faqma ice cream store, a very well known ice cream store where families frequently gather. As a result of the attack, fifteen cars were also burned in the largely Shi'ite neighborhood.
An improvised explosive device (IED)  injured two policemen.  The bomb exploded in the Mahmoudiyah town south of Baghdad.  IEDs are becoming increasingly popular weapons of choice.
Isurgents detonated a bomb in a busy market in southern Thailand's Yala province.  The attack left a forty-nine year old Buddhist woman dead along with ten others injured.  Attacks on crowded public places are common in southern Thailand.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Unidentified militants blew up a police checkpoint in Swat using a remote-controlled bomb.  Attacks on police forces are common in northwestern Pakistan.
A roadside bomb exploded near the College of Administration and Economics in Baghdad.  The explosion occurred at the Adhamiya neighborhood in north Baghdad.  As a result, one resident was killed and another was injured.
A roadside bomb detonated near a police car.  The police car was in Kirkuk and en route to Baghdad.  No casualties were associated with the attack.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
(4th of 4 attacks)A team of soldiers escorting teachers was rocked by a roadside bomb in southern Thailand's Yaring district.  The six-member team suffered heavy losses as one member was killed and the remaining five were all injured in the attack.  Attacks on teacher-escort teams are common in southern Thailand.  Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A suicide bomber in his early twenties attempted to enter a police training school in Sargodha.  He was stopped by security officials at the gate of the school, at which point he opened fire on the security guard, killing him.  Another guard then shot and killed the bomber.  There was one other guard wounded in the attack.
Gunmen killed Iraqi police officer Ismail Salim Khudaeir.  Mr. Khudaeir was a deputy director of provincial security affairs. The incident occurred outside the officer's house in Kirkuk.  Kirkuk is one hundred and fifty-five miles north of Baghdad.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
Authorities discovered home-made explosives in a suburb of Manila at the site of a housing project that U.S. Deputy Secretary of State John Negroponte was due to visit a few days in advance of his arrival.  Bomb experts disarmed the explosives, which were to be triggered by a cell phone.  The are no immediate suspects behind the bombing.
A remote-detonated, roadside bomb struck a police vehicle in Konar, Afghanistan.  The attack left three policemen dead and five others wounded.  Attacks on police forces are common in Afghanistan.
Unidentified gunmen killed Lu'ai Haqqi Rashid, director of the  Statistics and Information Technology Department at an institution in Baghdad.  Mr. Rashid was on his way to an office in the Al-Karradah neighborhood in eastern Baghdad when the attack occurred.
Twenty-three people were wounded in a grenade blast near the Jamia mosque in Banihal.  Among those injured were four policemen and two firefighters.  The blast took place on the Srinagar-Jammu highway.
A would-be suicide bomber detonated his bicycle full of explosives at a police headquarters in Zormat District.  Zormat District lies in restive Paktia Province.  The bomber was stopped just outside the headquarters, and thus detonated his bike before he could get inside.  He was subsequently arrested.The Taliban disputed this entire story, claiming that the attack was successful and killed several policemen.  Attacks on police forces are common in Afghanistan.
Nine people were killed and forty-four others were wounded in a large suicide bombing in Parachinar.  The bomber rammed his vehicle into a parked car, drawing in a crowd.  Shortly thereafter, he detonated his car bomb, creating a blast that also destroyed six different shops.  There was no immediate word on who was behind the attack.
Explosives rocked both an evangelical church and a market in Jijiga, Ethiopia.  Regional Vice President Jama Ahmed blamed the Ogaden National Liberation Front (ONLF) for the attack.  The ONLF have taken advantage of Ethiopia's recent troubles in Somalia, by stepping up their attacks in the volatile East.  These attacks have only served to destabilize recent eastern Ethiopia.  The ONLF are comprised of ethnic Somalis who are demanding greater autonomy from Ethiopia.However, shortly after the attack, the Mujahideen Youth Movement (MYM), who are embroiled in a fierce insurgency in Somalia claimed responsibility for the attack, proudly proclaiming that they slaughter worshippers of the Cross and Ethiopians.  The Mujahideen Youth Movement have been battling Ethiopia in Somalia since December.
Terrorists  kidnapped five guards from Husseiniyat Al Khwelis, a mosque north of Baquba city.
A suicide truck bombing in Tall Afar District killed 28 people and wounded fifty others.  The District is in Ninawa Governorate.  Among the dead, were twelve children.  The village where the bombing occurred is largely Shiite.  Witnesses said foam mattresses were sticking out of the truck in order to conceal the bombs.  Bombings have become increasingly common in villages as militants flee from security forces cracking down on Baghdad.
Unidentified militants detonated a bomb in Goalpara district, wounding three people at Agiapara evening market.  There was no immediate word on who was behind the attack.
A suicide car bomb killed seven people and wounded eight.  The attack occurred near a market in Salih al-Khalaf village, north of Baghdad.
An armed group of terrorists kidnapped AP Photographer Talal Ahmed Abdullah.  Mr. Abdullah was abducted in central Baquba, sixty kilometers north of Baghdad.  The area where the abduction is thought to have occurred is a hotbed for Sunni insurgent activity.
Gunmen suspected to be with the Taliban shot and killed two policemen and wounded eight others in an attack in Dand District in restive Kandahar Province.  Attacks on police forces are common in Afghanistan.
A parked car bomb injured four policemen and one civilian.   The bomb targeted highway patrol vehicles.  The attack happened in Kirkuk.
Police found the decapitated body of Jitr Techawanto, one of two locals killed and beheaded in southern Thailand's Pattani district.  His headless body was used as a booby-trap for local security forces.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed Mayuki Jehmalae, a rubber plantation worker in southern Thailand's Narathiwat neighborhood.  The victim made a living by working for rubber plant owners.  Attacks on these plantations are common in southern Thailand as they are an important part of the national economy.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Gunmen blew up a bridge connecting Salahudin and Kirkuk.  Explosives were placed underneath the Pitrokimiawiat bridge near the Makhoul mountain.
Two improvised explosives devices (IED's) detonated.  As a result, two policemen and two civilians were injured.  The  attack occurred in Kirkuk's  Domeez neighborhood, near al-Nidaa husseiniya.
A roadside bomb detonated near a minibus in Baqouba.  As a result of the attack, two passengers died and four were wounded.  Baqouba is thirty-five miles northeast of Baghdad.
Gunmen shot and killed Mahad Ahmad Elmi, a prominent journalist in Somalia, whille he was about to start his daily morning radio show.  During his show, he typically asks residents of Mogadishu to describe their experiences, often violent, for the previous night.  Through this approach, citizens could learn what was happening in other parts of the city.This attack has been viewed in both diplomatic and media circles as particularly devastating as it lead to the killing of Elmi's colleague, who was killed in a bombing while attending Elmi's funeral.  Both the United Nations and numerous media outlets have condemned both of these atacks.  Both the government and the insurgents have traded blame for the attacks.Civil servants and journalists have been frequent targets of attacks and have been caught in the midst of the strife that has consumed the country since the Union of Islamic Courts was ousted from power.
A roadside bomb killed the Khalil Jalil Hamza,  governor and police chief of the Qadisiyah province.  In addition, the chief's body guard and driver were killed as well.  Mr. Hamza was a member of the Supreme Islamic Iraqi Council.  The attack occurred in Afak, eighteen miles east of Diwaniya.
Gunmen attacked police near Daqouq. Daqouq is near Kirkuk.   As a result of the attack, three policemen died and one was injured.  One of the policeman's wife committed suicide after she heard that her husband had died.
Unidentified militants beheaded two Afghan nationals whom they accused of working for coalition forces.  The bodies were found with no head, legs, or arms, as well as note warning those considering working for coalition forces in the future.
An unidentified gunmen shot and killed three policemen in an ambush against a police patrol in Hangu.  The attack also left two passersby wounded as well.
Five policemen were killed in Kandahar province in a remote-detonated roadside bomb attack in Kandahar.  Attacks on police forces are common in Afghanistan.
Bombers destroyed an empty house.  The house belonged to Colonel Esam al-Azzawi.  Mr. Azzawi is the head of the police academy in Tikrit.  Tikrit is about one hundred miles north of Baghdad.
Mustapha Kertali, a former member of the Armed Islamist Group (GIA), was the target of a failed car bombing in a town twenty-five kilometers south of Algiers.  Mr. Kertali survived the attack, but was placed in intensive care afterwards.  He had worked with various other armed groups during Algeria's civil war, which lasted until a 1999 peace accord.A spokesperson for Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb later came forth and admitted that one of its members, without consulting the group's leadership, conducted the attack.  The spokesperson claimed that this was a mistake.
Ten civilians were killed and six injured in a truck explosion.  The explosion occurred near the Thira'a Dijla bridge north of Baghdad.  The bridge was completely destroyed.  Also, three cars fell into the river afterwards.
Four truck bombs hit a poor rural area near the Syrian border. The bombs went off near an area of mud and stone houses.   The known casualty toll is an astonishing 500-plus dead and one thousand and five hundred wounded. The Iraqi Red Crescent Society calls this attack the bloodiest coordinated attack since 2003.  Even a week after the explosion, emergency workers are still trying to remove bodies from the scenes of the explosion and identifying the wounded.Officials believe that the terrorists were going after Yazidis.  They think so because of the proximity to the Syrian border.  Yazidis are people who worship an angel whose name is sometimes translated to Satan in the Koran.  Others also believe this attack was retribution for an incident in April, when a Yazidi woman was stoned to death by Yazidis because she married a Sunni.  However, the latter detail is far from conclusive.This attack supports the idea that insurgent cells have flowed away from high troop affiliations and have gone to smaller villages instead.  Two of the truck bombs that went off, were five miles apart in the Shaam Desert.  The mayor of Sinjar said all four trucks approached their target from dirt roads and they all exploded within minutes of each other.
Seven militants with the Karbi Longri National Liberation Front (KLNLF) assaulted a group of policemen in Howraghat.  However, the were no casualties reported.
Gunmen opened fire on a patrol of police commandos at Doura neighborhood, in south Baghdad. As a result of the attack, three died and two were injured.
A sniper killed a policeman.  The attack occurred in al-Shuhadaa district in Falluja.  Attacks on police forces are common in Iraq.
Unidentified militants detonated bombs at three power pylons in Gadap Town.  The blasts disrupted power supply from Hub to Jamshoro.  Two other bombs were found and disposed of the same day.
A bomb exploded outside the fence of Baghdad Zoo.  As a result, three were injured.
A roadside bomb in southern Kirkuk wounded four policemen.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
Insurgents launched a series of attacks in Narathiwat and Yala provinces throughout the evening of the August 15th and the morning of August 16th.  While exact casualty numbers were not discussed, newspaper reports stated that three officials were injured.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A bomb exploded outside the food stall in a public park in southern Thailand's Yala province.  The bomb injured a forty year-old trader who was working at the stall.  Attacks in public places are common in southern Thailand.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Four died and nine were wounded because of an improvised explosives device (IED) explosion.  The bomb targeted police in downtown Kirkuk.
A Mukha grenade launcher hooked up to a timing device was found 30 meters from an oil tank during an inspection of the Karabulakskiy oil refinery in the Karabulakskiy District of Ingushetia. The launcher was aimed at nearby oil cisterns. Bomb experts from Ingushetia's OMON special police force diffused the device and no injuries were reported.Political murders, bombings, and other violence between Russian police forces and Chechen separatists continue to undermine stability in Chechnya, though violence is becoming increasingly sporadic.
Unidentified gunmen kidnapped four engineers of a construction company in Shah Wali Kot District.  There was no report of any ransom demand.  In addition, a loader belonging to the Hashem Construction Company was set ablaze.
An unidentified militant tossed a grenade a police checkpoint in Bannu, Pakistan, killing one police officer and wounding four others.  Attacks on police forces are common in northwestern Pakistan.
Mortar shells landed in the Green Zone.  The Green Zone, also called the International Zone, is home to embassies and government offices.
A small explosive device detonated near a bus station outside the central market in Grozny's Leninskiy District. Sappers were called in to search the area but no additional explosive devices were found.No injuries were reported and police have not identified any suspects.
The Taliban targeted a police vehicle, detonating a remote-controlled landmine, killing two police officers.  Attacks on police forces are common in Afghanistan.
A university lecturer was found dead in Mosul.  The body was found five days after he was abducted on August 20, 2007.
Mr. Muhammad Ali Al-Hasani, the governor of Muthanna, was assassinated after a roadside bomb detonated near his convoy.  Mr. Al-Hasani was on his way to his office in Samawah city, about two hundred and fifty kilometers south of Baghdad.  In addition to his death, two of his companions and two of his guards were killed because of the bomb.  The governor was part of the Supreme Islamic Council of Iraq (SIIC).  He is the second governor from SIIC to be killed in the last ten days.
Insurgents detonated a bomb at the hydro-measure station in Waeng district.  The attack did not result in any casualties. However, they damaged the control system at the station.  Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Unidentified gunmen sprayed a police intelligence officer with gunfire as he was waiting to catch a bus in Dera Ismail Khan.  Attacks on police forces are common in northwestern Pakistan.
The brother of a policeman was killed when he drove through the village of Kanaan.   A colonel in Baquba police confirmed the report.
A suicide bomber wearing an explosives vest detonated, wounding eight people.  The incident occurred in a line outside a police station in police station in Falluja.  Falluja is about thirty miles west of Baghdad.
An improvised bomb detonated below a concrete bench in a crowded plaza in Zamboanga City.  The explosion, which took place during the evening, injured roughly twelve people.  It was not immediately clear who was behind the attack.
A suicide fuel tanker bombing targeting a Baiji police station killed twenty-seven people and wounded seventy-nine. Baiji is an oil rich city.  Doctors at a local hospital said most of the victims were civilians.  The police station that the bomb targeted was at the center of the market in the town.
A suicide truck bomb targeted an  education department building used by Iraqi police.  As a result of the attack, twelve people were killed and twenty-five were injured.  The explosion also destroyed many nearby houses.
A booby-trapped parked car exploded, killing two people.  The bombs in the car were laced to dead bodies.  A police officer was among the dead.  The attack took place in Mosul.
A suicide motorcycle bombing killed ten people and wounded thirty one.  The bomber was trying to detonate near a police patrol in a market in the town of Muqdadiya, fifty miles northeast of Baghdad.
Gunmen with the Taliban abducted the district intelligence chief of Rashidan District.  There was no immediate word on any ransom demands made on behalf of the Taliban.
Dozens of masked fighters launched a coordinated attack on police in Samarra.  The terrorists entered the city in 20 machine-gun mounted pickups and then split up to attack various checkpoints and buildings.  It is estimated that sixty terrorists were involved in the attack.  No U.S. casualties were reported and it is unclear how many Iraqis died as a result of the attack.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a seventy-one year old Buddhist on his motorcycle in southern Thailand's Narathiwat district.  Attacks on Buddhists are common because the Malay insurgents view them as embodying what they perceive to be northern Thailand's attempt to impose Buddhism and Thai culture on the remote south.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Four electricity pylons were dynamited by members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC), in the rural area of Cajibo.
A parked car killed seven people and wounded thirty others.  The attack occurred in the Kadhimiya district in northwestern Baghdad.
A suicide bomber detonated himself outside of the United Nations office in Kabul.  The attack wounded six people, including two foreigners, three civilians, and a policeman.  According to eyewitnesses, the bomber was targeting a vehicle of foreign nationals.  There was no immediate word on who was behind the attack.
Police have blamed Islamist insurgents for an attack on a school in south Mogadishu, which killed two students.  The attack came on Sunday as Sunday is a school day in much of the Muslim Horn of Africa.  Indiscriminant attacks, especially those involving hand grenades and road-side bombs, have become increasingly more common in Somalia.
Terrorists attacked the Al-Rashidiyah Police Station in Baghdad.  As a result of the attack, three policemen were wounded.  The terrorists' identities are unknown.
Authorities have discovered two remote-triggered claymore bombs along the Puttlam-Kalpitiya road.  It is believed that the bombs were planted there to target Minister Risath Bathiyutheen.  He was expected to be in the area during the  launch of a development project.
A police lieutenant colonel in al-Bu Ajeel village died.  He was killed by gunmen near Tikrit, a city one hundred and ten miles north of Baghdad.
Unidentified insurgents shot and killed an elderly construction worker in southern Thailand's Pattani province.  The victim's body was then set ablaze by the attackers.  It should be noted that the victim was also a Buddhist.  Buddhists are frequently targeted by Thailand's southern separatists.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Armed rebels with the New People's Army (NPA) kidnapped a member of the Intelligence Service of the Armed Forces of the Philippines (ISAFP) in the city of Monkayo.  They abducted Corporal Frederick Gayle in the early hours of the morning and torched a large dump truck owned by a large mining company.  Attacks on police forces are not uncommon in the Philippines as the NPA continues its violent insurgency.
Two policemen and a civilian were victims of gunfire.  The attack took place in Kirkuk.  As a result of the attack, the three individuals were wounded.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed an ice cream vendor in front of a school in southern Thailand's Narathiwat neighborhood.  Attacks on educational institutional institutions are common in Thailand as are attacks on ice cream vendors catering to the schools.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Unidentified miscreants tossed a grenade at the home of Khorsing Engti, the Assam Hill Areas Development.  Authorities suspect that the Karbi Longri National Liberation Front.  There was no official word on who was behind the attack, though.
 Terrorists set fire to an office of the Supreme Iraqi Islamic Council (SIIC).  The attack occurred in Kufa, one hundred and sixty kilometers south of Baghdad.
Gunmen killed a police officer in a drive-by shooting.  The attack occurred in Najaf, one hundred miles south of Baghdad.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a village leader in southern Thailand's Mayo district.  Masameg Sameng was the latest victim in a series of attacks against village leaders by southern Thailand's separatists.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Two roadside bombs targeted a vehicle belonging to Brigadier Burhan Taeeb, the head of Kirkuk Police Station.  As a result, one of his guards was injured and the vehicle was damaged.
Gunmen with the Communist Party of India-Maoists shot and killed twelve policemen in Chhattisgarh state.  This was one of the worst attacks against police in the region, following the deaths of twenty-four personnel in an ambush in July and the deaths of fifty-five policemen in March.
Terrorists killed an Iraqi interpreter working with Multinational Forces in Wasit Governorate, southeast of Baghdad.  The victim, Husayn Aziz, was killed near the Presidency of Wasit University in al-Kut City, capital of the governorate.
The spokesman of the security forces in Najaf City said that the official of the dibathification committee in Najaf survived and assassination attempt.  Terrorists tried using an improvised explosives device,  IED, to kill the official and planted the device near his house.  The house is in the Al Ghadeer neighborhood of downtown Najaf City.
Gunmen on a motorbike killed a Shi'ite preacher outside his mosque in central Basra.  Basra is 340 miles southeast of Baghdad.
A roadside bomb targeting a police patrol wounded three policemen.  The attack occurred in Baghdad's western Yarmouk district.  Terrorists frequently use roadside bombs to target police vehicles.
A bomb exploded in a crowded Baghdad square.  As a result, nine people died and fifteen were injured.  Bombs are frequently used in attacks in public places  in Iraq.
One person was killed and five were wounded because of a car bomb.  The bomb exploded in a market in the Zaafaraniya district of southern Baghdad.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol in Kirkuk.  As a result, four civilians were wounded.  Kirkuk is one hundred and fifty five miles north of Baghdad.
Insurgents planted a number of bombs intended to target a group of teachers and their military escorts.  While media reports seemed to indicate that the bombs detonated, they failed to kill or injure their target.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
The Chief of Police of al-Siniyah district was killed along with two members of his security detail.  Terrorists executed the attack through the use of an improvised explosives device (IED).  Because of the attack, Iraqi security forces announced a curfew for the district.
Two bomb explosions rocked Zamboanga City in the early morning.  The first blast detonated near a public market.  The second detonated just ten minutes later and rocked a coffee shop, injuring one policeman.  Both blasts took place in the public market area. Coordinated with incident #43541
A member of the Kurdistan Democratic Party (PDK) party was killed by gunmen in Mosul city.
Insurgents planted a bomb inside of a refrigerator in convenience store in southern Thailand's Yala province.  The bomb detonated as a man opened the door to get a drink.  The ensuing blast killed the man and wounded two children.  Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Insurgents attempted to assassinate Somphrat Chongchit, a local administration officer outside an old city hall in southern Thailand.  The assailants concealed a bomb underneath his pickup truck and attempted to detonate it.  However, the device malfunctioned and did not explode.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A car bomb planted near the Sarchnar  bakery wounded four people.  The bombing occurred in Kirkuk.  Kirkuk is a northern city, one hundred and fifty-five miles north of Baghdad.
(2nd of 2 attacks)Insurgents detonated a bomb targeting a police patrol detonated in southern Thailand's Yala province. The bomb did not injure any of its targets.  However, it prompted a bomb disposal squad to arrive on the scene, which was promptly hit by a second explosion.  Three were injured in the second attack.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Two unidentified attackers attempted to blow up a mini-bus traveling on a road between the towns of Baksan and Chegem in the republic of Kabardino-Balkaria. The passengers were reportedly traveling to celebrations commemorating the 450th anniversary of the accession of Kabardino-Balkaria to Russia. No one was injured in the attack.Following the incident, President of Kabardino-Balkaria Arsen Kanokov said that 500 to 700 radicals remain in the republic, but that there are no underground bandit formations capable of conducting large-scale operations similar to an attack on police in 2005 that resulted in many fatalities.
A car bomb exploded near a Baghdad police station.  As a result, one person died and five were wounded.
Police discovered the bullet-riddled body of Areeyah Mae-sae, a deputy village chief, in southern Thailand's Yaha district.  Along with his body, police found the bodies of two suspected insurgents.  Authorities speculate that the two deceased killed Mae-sae, but that Mae-sae was able to return fire before his death.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Armed insurgents attacked a government base in north eastern Mogadishu, killing seven police officers and injuring three.  The neighborhood in which the attack took place is viewed as an insurgent stronghold
An improvised explosive device exploded roughly 800 m from a building housing a police unit from the Interior Ministry in the capital of the republic of Kabarda-Balkaria, Nalchik. Local police estimated that the device may have been equivalent to about 1 kg of TNT. No one was injured in the explosion.
An explosive device comprised of a diving cylinder filled with a chlorate mixture linked to a gas cylinder was found and defused outside the door of the Moroccan consulate in the town of Biguglia.  No one has claimed responsibility for the attack.
A car bomb killed two people and wounded six.  The attack occurred near a hospital in central Baghdad.  The car bomb was parked near the ambulance center.
An unidentified gunman on a motorcycle attempted to kill a forty-two year old teacher in southern Thailand's Rangae district.  The bullet, however, missed, and hit a local villager.  Attacks on teachers are common in southern Thailand as separatists view them as an extension of the state.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A planted bomb put inside a sedan car exploded in front of the fine arts institution.  The attack occurred in the Mansour neighborhood of west Baghdad.  As a result of the attack, one person died and five were injured.
An unidentified gunman shot and killed Isama-ae Hassa a forty-three year old local defense volunteer in southern Thailand's Pattani province.  The victim was riding his motorbike early in the morning when he was killed.  Attacks on local defense volunteers are not uncommon in southern Thailand.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Gunmen killed a policeman near his house.  The attack occurred in Hilla, sixty miles south of Baghdad.  Attacks on police forces are common in Iraq.
At least three politicians have been injured in attacks in the Valle de Cauca and others have received death threats, including Hector Copete, Tatiana Palacio Mayorga, and Eugenia Sofia Torres Jordan.
A sniper killed a policeman.  The attack occurred in Mosul.  Mosul is 240 miles north of Baghdad.  Four other policemen were also wounded.
An unidentified gunman shot and killed a government informant in southern Thailand's restive Narathiwat province.  The victim was driving his motorcycle in a fruit orchard when he was shot in the face by his assailant.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
The bodies of a police officer and a local judge were found in Balad.  Balad is fifty miles north of Baghdad.
Gunmen assassinated a police colonel.  The attack occurred in Ifech, near Diwana.  Police arrested the head and member of a town council afterwards since he was a suspect.
Unknown gunmen attacked a police checkpoint at Hadhra Muhamadiyah intersection in Falluja.  The terrorists used a grenade to kill a civilian and injure five policemen.
A Sunni mosque preacher who belonged to the Kurdish Islamic Union was shot dead in northwestern Mosul.  Mosul is two hundred and forty miles north of Baghdad.  Attacks on mosques are common in Iraq.
A roadside bomb exploded, wounding a guard and a pedestrian.  The attack occurred in Kirkuk.  The bomb exploded near the convoy of a member of the Kurdistan Democratic Party.
Two workers for CARE International were shot and injured while working just outside of Mogadishu.  Gunmen shot at them as their vehicle passed through the neighborhood.  Also injured in the attack were a woman and a child.Violence against civil servants, aid workers, politicians, and ordinary Somalis has been extremely common in recent months.  Since routing the Union of Islamic Courts in December in 2006, both Ethiopia and Somalia's transitional government have been combating a fierce insurgency campaign.
Ikhlas al-Shimari escaped unhurt from a bomb attack on her house.  The incident took place in Kut, one hundred miles southeast of Baghdad. Mr. Shimari was a female member of the Kut governing council
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed Abdurakhman Neyriyev, the acting head of the criminal investigation department of the Sunzhenskiy District Internal Affairs Department, as he was leaving a local mosque after the evening prayer. No suspects have been identified. Attacks against police, officials, and ethnically non-Ingush residents continue to undermine stability in Ingushetia. Russian media generally blame the attacks on Arab jihadists. Others accuse Russian federal forces of randomly assaulting and abducting local Ingush residents in response to insurgent attacks, thereby engendering local resentment.
Insurgents attacked an Iraqi police patrol with a roadside bomb, killing one officer and injuring four other officers and a nearby civilian.Attacks on police forces are common in Iraq.
Gunmen killed Sheikh Amjed al-Janabi, an aide to Ayatollah al-Sistani in a drive-by shooting while he was on his way to the local mosque.  In addition to killing Sheikh Ahmed, gunmen injured one of his security personnel.  This is third time an aide to al-Sistani has been killed in Basra.
The Association on Muslim scholars, Iraq's biggest Sunni organization claimed that a sectarian militia killed four Sunnis in western Baghdad and shortly thereafter looted and torched their homes.
Nine people were wounded when a suicide bomber drove his explosive-laden vehicle into a truck convoy about 100 kilometers outside of Algiers.  Those injured included two French people, one Italian, their Algerian driver, and five Algerian gendarmes.  The victims were employees of a construction firm.  This attack came only hours after Al-Qaeda issued a call for attacks against French targets.  Shortly after the attack, Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb claimed responsibility.  The group issued a statement which revealed the name of the attacker, who was 31 years old and had been with the group for less than a year.
Mohanad al-Obdeidi, an employee of the Iraqi Islamic Party's Dar el-Salam radio, was shot and killed by gunmen in Mosul.  Attacks on journalists are common in Iraq.This attacks comes on the heels of another assasination of a Dar al-Salam radio station employee, Muhannad Ghanim.
Insurgents lured a team of bomb experts with an explosion and subsequently attacked them with a second remote-detonated explosive and small arms fire in southern Thailand's Yala province.  After responding to reports of an explosion in Yaha district, a bomb rescued squad found itself rocked by a second explosion at the scene of the first explosion.  Insurgents then engaged the team in a firefight that lasted twenty minutes.  Overall, eight officers were seriously wounded.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A sniper shot and wounded an Iraqi police brigadier general  in Basra.  Attacks on police forces are common in Iraq.
In the early hours of the morning, three improvised explosive devices targeting three separate houses of Iraqi policemen detonated, injuring ten.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
A roadside bomb killed one policeman and injured another in Mosul.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
Insurgents bombarded the Green Zone in Baghdad with mortars, but no casualties were reported.
Police found four bodies, one of which was a policeman, shot in Jbela.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
A suicide bomber attacked a reconciliation meeting between key Shiite and Sunni leaders at a mosque, killing 28 and wounding at least fifty.  Two U.S. soldiers were wounded as well because they were in attendance in support of the event.  The Islamic state of Iraq claimed responsibility for the attack.Recently, the U.S. has noted reconciliation between Sunni and Shiite moderates and tribal leaders as signs of progress in Iraq.  It is believed that the Islamic state of Iraq is targeting these leaders in the hopes of stifling this progress.  The attack took place in a former al-Qaeda in Iraq stronghold.
Jawad al-Daami, a Baghdadiya television journalist, was shot and killed by gunmen in southwestern Baghdad.  Attacks on journalists are frequent in Iraq.
Would be assasins attempted to kill the acting manager of Radio Shabelle, one of Somalia's largest radio stations.  According to witnesses, an unidentified man fired twice at Jafar Mohammed and missed him.  This attack comes amidst a wave of killings targeting journalists in the country.  Four have been killed since January.  In addition, over eighty percent of Mogadishu's district commissioners or their deputies have been killed under similar circumstances.
Two coordinated car bombs exploded in Baghdad, killing six and wounding twenty.  The bombs went off in succession.  Coordinated bomb attacks are common in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed police Lt. Col. Ali Sameen in Tuz Khormato, a city north of Baghdad.  The deceased served as the director of emergency services for the town.Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
A roadside bomb attack near a police station in the Karrada district of Baghdad resulted in seven people injured.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
An explosion from a roadside bomb struck a minibus, killing one and wounding three.  The explosion took place in Kamaliyah district in eastern Baghdad.This attack comes in a three day spate of attacks aimed at undermining the perception that the surge in U.S. troop levels in Iraq has brought down levels of violence. This increase in violence has predominantly targeted prominent tribal leaders opposed to al-Qaeda in Iraq.
The district commissioner of Heliwaa District was killed by insurgents along with a police official at the Weliwaa District headquarters.
A suicide bomber in a truck killed ten and injured nine in an attack on a Sunni tribal leader opposed to al-Qaeda in Iraq.  The blast killed his son.  This attack comes in a three day spate of attacks aimed at undermining the perception that the surge in U.S. troop levels in Iraq has brought down levels of violence.  This increase in violence has predominantly targeted prominent tribal leaders opposed to al-Qaeda in Iraq.
A car bomb in Mosul killed two policemen.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives at a police checkpoint in Fallujah.  However, there were no reported casualties.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed an adviser to the Iraqi parliament.  The victim was a Shiite.  Attacks on government members are common in Iraq.
Two car bombs struck a line of elderly individuals waiting to get their pensions from a bank, killing six.  Car bombings are extremely common in Iraq.
Insurgents fired upon the vehicle of a deputy regional police chief in Somalia.  The official managed to escape the assasination attempt.  Assasination attempts against government and police forces in Somalia are extremely common.
Insurgents attacked a crude oil pipeline with a bomb, rupturing it.  Attacks on oil installations and other major infrastructure installations are common in Iraq.
Roughly twenty armed men attacked Saipem Nigeria Limited, an Italian oil firm in the Niger Delta.  The attack resulted in the death of one expatriate and the kidnapping of another.  The Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta (MEND) is suspected.
The bodies of an Iraqi policeman and his wife were found with signs of torture and gunshot wounds.  Attacks on police forces are common in Iraq.
Insurgents attacked a police station with rocket launchers and machine guns, and briefly seized it.  During the fighting, they shouted Allahu Akbar as they torched two nearby vehicles.  Amidst the gunfight, two police officers and four civilians were killed.After torching the station, the attackers fled.
Gunmen shot to death an imam from the Gudben village mosque on his way to morning prayers. Nurmagomed Gadzhimagomedov, a vocal critic of Islamic extremism, had spoken out against militants during a service at the mosque the day before his murder. The district police chief reported that the killing was clearly a revenge attack by Islamic militants.A low-level guerilla war has been underway in the Republic of Dagestan since 2000. Anti-Kremlin violence, ethnic tension, and feuding among criminal gangs throughout Dagestan and the other Northern Caucasian Russian republics continue to undermine social, political, and economic stability in the region. Victims of local violence tend to be members of local police forces, but also include Dagestani rebels, civilians, and federal servicemen and officials.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a forty-year old Muslim man in southern Thailand's volatile Narathiwat province.  The victim was killed in a drive-by shooting as he was en route to evening prayer at a local mosque.  Drive-by shootings are common in southern Thailand.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Two men armed with pistols shot and killed Shaykh Hassan Kulow, a cleric in Baydhabo, as he was on his way to the local mosque.  This is the first killing of a major religious scholar in Baydhabo since the Transitional Federal Government took power in 2006.Assassinations of religious figures, government members, and police officers have been common since Somalia's insurgency flared up in 2006.
Gunmen shot and killed two Iraqi policemen in Mosul.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
A bicycle bomb detonated by unknown assailants injured two people at a gas station in Bogota. The gas station is frequently used by police officers to fill up vehicles.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a policeman's wife as she was riding on her motorcycle to a rubber plantation in southern Thailand's restive Pattani province.  Mariyam Luemae was with her husband when she died; he survived the attack.  Attacks on policemen are common in southern Thailand.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Unidentified arsonists set ablaze three telephone booths, one car, and a private residence.  This attack comes amidst a flurry of bombings and shootings throughout the same day in restive southern Thailand.  Islamic insurgents are suspected as arson remains a key tactic in their low-level insurgency.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Police discovered a four kilogram bomb set to detonate at 8:10 AM in a grocery store in southern Thailand's volatile Narathiwat province.  Stuffed inside a metal pipe and wired with a digital watch, the bomb was safely defused.  It was also the second bomb discovered in a commercial store in the province in as many days. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A roadside bomb struck a police patrol in Zayuna neighborhood in eastern Baghdad wounding three police officers and three others.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
Police found the bodies of a policeman and his brother in Tuz Khormato.  Police lsited their nationality simply as Turkman.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
Three consecutive roadside bomb explosions struck the convoy of the Polish ambassador to Iraq, wounding him along with nine other individuals near his convoy.  The ambassador sustained minor burns over twenty percent of his body and was flown home after the attack.  The attack also killed three others, including a member of his security team.
Gunmen attacked a police patrol in Tikrit, killing a police captain and injuring two other officers.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
A roadside bomb struck a bus in the Za'faraniyah neighborhood of eastern Baghdad, killing three and wounding seven others.  This attack came on a day in which insurgents struck two other buses in two separate attacks.  Attacks on transportation infrastructure and modes of transport are common in Iraq.
Gunmen attacked a police checkpoint in Dowr (Salahudin province), killing two officers.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
Attackers killed a public official in Hillah, southeast of Baghdad.  Attacks on members of government are very common in Iraq.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed an elderly man in a market in southern Thailand's restive Narathiwat province.  The attack occurred amidst a spate of violent attacks in the province that day.  Islamic insurgents are suspected.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a local defense forces volunteer in southern Thailand's restive Narathiwat province.  The forty-four year old man was headed home from a rubber plantation when insurgents ambushed him and shot him six times.  Attacks on local defense forces are common in Thailand, as are attacks on the rubber in industry.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Gunmen shot and killed Sheikh Yasir Al Yasiri in his home in Basra.  Al Yasiri was a professor at Al Sadr religious university and was one of two professors from the university killed that day.
(2nd of 3 attacks)Islamic insurgents targeted three assistant village chiefs in Thailand's volatile south.  Unidentified gunmen shot and severely wounded the assistant village chief of Rangae district in Narathiwat province.  Sorpee Maeroh was riding his motorbike at night when he was shot four times.  Media reports stated that he was in critical condition.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A car bomb targeting a police patrol killed one civilian, and wounded eleven others in Kirkuk.  Those injured included four police officers.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
The Mujahideen Youth Movement has claimed the assassination of the security secretary of Wadagir county's police station.  Ahmad Harid had served as the head of the station, who had been active in rooting out the Mujahideen forces.  Attacks on members of government as well as attacks on police forces are common in Iraq.
(1st of 3 attacks)Islamic insurgents targeted three assistant village chiefs in Thailand's volatile south.  A lone, unidentified gunman shot and killed Wae-hama Kahamah, assistant village chief of Yarang district in Pattani province.  Kahamah was walking out of a mosque when his killer shot him in the head at point blank range and escaped on a nearby motorcycle.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
The Islamic State of Iraq claimed an attack against a leader in a tribal awakening council in Baghdad.  In a posting on its website, the group claims to have killed a man by the name of Ala in Baghdad's Karkh region.  He was a major figure in the Awakening of Baghdad Council.A tribal awakening council is a group of sheiks and local tribal leaders, predominantly Sunnis, who have recently allied with U.S. forces in an attempt to oust al-Qaeda in Iraq and other extremists from their neighborhoods.  Recently, insurgents have stepped up attacks against these bodies in attempt to undermine and intimidate them.  Meanwhile, the U.S. heralds them as signs of progress in Iraq.
A car bomb detonated near the University of Technology in Baghdad, killing four and wounding ten.  This attack came in a flurry of three sizeable bombings in Baghdad.  However, it is not believed that the attacks were coordinated.  Attacks on schools, educational institutions, and academics are common in Iraq.
Insurgents launched four mortars at the Green Zone, which houses U.S. military personnel, important Iraqi political figures, and many major embassies.  No casualties were reported.  Mortar attacks on the Green Zone are common in Iraq.
A suicide car bomber attacked the head of a local tribal awakening council, Thamer Ibrahim Atallah near his home in Baiji.  Atallah escaped the attack unharmed, but ten others died and twenty-two others were wounded.  Those killed included members of his family.  The tribal awakening council is a group of sheiks and local tribal leaders, predominantly Sunnis, who have recently allied with U.S. forces in an attempt to oust al-Qaeda in Iraq and other extremists from their neighborhoods.  Recently, insurgents have stepped up attacks against these bodies in attempt to undermine and intimidate them.  Meanwhile, the U.S. heralds them as signs of progress in Iraq.
A car bomb detonated near a fuel station in northeastern Baghdad, killing one and wounding four.  The explosion struck the Bunoug neighborhood and was the fourth car bomb of the day in Baghdad.
Ibrahim Abd al-Karim, the head of the Shiite Waqf Bureau, was shot and killed inside his car by unknown gunmen in eastern Baghdad's Al-Mashtal neighborhood.  Attacks on governmental figures are common in Iraq.
A policeman was shot and killed by gunmen in the city of Diwaniyah in southern Iraq.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a middle aged local defense volunteer in southern Thailand's volatile Narathiwat province.  This was the second shooting of local security forces personnel that day.  Attacks on local security forces are common in southern Thailand.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Gunmen attacked a Kia minibus in Baghdad's Sadiyah neighborhood at 1:00 in the afternoon.  The attack occurred at al-Rafah Junction and  left one passenger dead and six others wounded.  This was the first of two attacks on buses that day in Baghdad.
According to the U.S. military, five Islamic militants assaulted the home of Abu Bilal, an imam known for preaching anti al-Qaeda messages in the local mosques.  The assailants detonated an IED outside the home of one of Bilal's neighbors and fired a rocket propelled grenade into their house.  They then entered Bilal's home and executed him and injured his wife.  His nephew, who was home at the time, killed two of the attackers.  The U.S. military then killed the other three the following day.
The Mujahideen Youth Movement claimed to have liquidated Umar Siad Ajas, a member of the Transitional Federal Government's intelligence services.  Attacks on alleged members of the intelligence services are quite common in Somalia.  According to reports, the attack took place in Al-Bacara market
Gunmen assaulted a police station just outside of Tuz Khurmato in northern Iraq.  The assailants killed a first lieutenant, according to police.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a retired janitor in a drive-by shooting southern Thailand's volatile Narathiwat province.  Attacks on members of specific governmental job initiative programs, including janitors, are common in southern Thailand, as are drive-by shootings.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A bomb hidden in a cart of toys exploded at a playground in Tuz Khormatu, killing two people and wounding seventeen others.  One of those killed was a child.  The explosion took place as children were celebrating the Islamic holiday of Eid al-Fitr.
Insurgents attacked a police base in Beledweyene with hand grenades, killing one person and wounding two others.  The report indicated that the victims were civilians and not police officers.  Attacks on police forces are common in Somalia.
A bomb explosion rocked a guest house in a hotel in Myawaddy, a border town between Thailand and Burma.  One Burmese national was injured in the attack.  Burma has seen a spate of violent activity in the past few days as the state has been combating a series of protests being staged by peace activists and Burmese monks throughout the country.  A number of bomb attacks have taken place recently, though the government blames them on landmine explosions.
Communist rebels with the New People's Army (NPA) torched a  telecommunications cell site in Camarines Sur.  According to reports, four young men armed with rifles held the guard on duty hostage at gunpoint as they torched the generator and the cabin at the site, aided by a can of gasoline.
A former Iraqi police officer was shot and killed by gunmen in Baqubah.  Attacks on police are frequent in Iraq.
Police discovered a seventeen kilogram bomb stuffed in a drain pipe along a major thoroughfare in Rangae district.  The police safely defused the device, which had simply failed to explode.  Often, insurgents plant bombs in the hopes that bomb squads arrive on the scene so that they can detonate a second explosive.  However, insurgents did not employ such tactics in this case.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A suicide bomber drove his car into a crowded amusement park in Baghdad's Harthiyah neighborhood and blew himself up, killing four and wounding at least twenty-five others.  The attack, which occurred in Zawraa park in west Baghdad, took place during the Muslim festival of Eid al-Fitr.  Many families were visiting the park in celebration of the holiday and were enjoying a feast when the blast occurred.
One civilian was killed and two others were injured in a roadside bomb attack in downtown Baghdad's Arasat neighborhood.  According to reports, the roadside bomb targeted the civilians.
A suicide bomber drove a tanker into a police station, killing four policemen and wounding seventy-five others.  The tanker, which was laden with explosives and full of fuel, struck the al-Rammah police station in northern Mosul in the mid afternoon.  Attacks on police, though extremely common in Iraq, rarely occur on a scale like this.
An explosive device exploded at the home of Vicente Ripa, the Spanish government delegate in the Navarre region of northern Spain.  The explosion caused no injuries but started a fire that Ripa was able to put out.
Roadside bombs killed a drug enforcement agent and injured 18 other people in Putumayo. The Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) are suspected of being responsible for the attack.
Insurgents detonated a bomb in a public telephone in restive southern Thailand's Sungai Kolok district.  Reportedly, no one was harmed in the attack.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Gunmen shot and killed three members of a local tribal awakening council in a drive-by shooting in Dhuluiya, a city roughly seventy kilometers north of Baghdad.A tribal awakening council is a group of sheiks and local tribal leaders, predominantly Sunnis, who have recently allied with U.S. forces in an attempt to oust al-Qaeda in Iraq and other extremists from their neighborhoods.  Recently, insurgents have stepped up attacks against these bodies in attempt to undermine and intimidate them.  Meanwhile, the U.S. heralds them as signs of progress in Iraq.
Mohammed Kadhum al-Atabi, a fifty-four year-old biological researcher was beaten and abducted in front of his family by fifteen gunmen in his home in Baghdad.  His body was found on Thursday.  The deceased was also a former administrator at the University of Baghdad.
A bomb targeting an outspoken critic of al-Qaeda detonated during prayers, killing him along with six worshippers present at the service.  Sheikh Nadhim al-Jubouri was struck by a blast from under his pulpit at around mid-day in Duluiyah, seventy-five kilometers north of Baghdad.Recently, insurgents have stepped up attacks against Sunni imams and other tribal leaders that have railed against al-Qaeda.
A roadside bomb struck a minibus in Iskandariyah, a town fifty kilometers south of Baghdad.  The attack killed three and injured nine.  Recently, Iraq has seen a wave of attacks against minibuses.
The president of Talih neighborhood in Hazan Province was killed by the Mujahideen Youth Movement.  Details of the weapon and tactic were not given in the claim posted on their website.  Attacks on prominent local and national political leaders are common in Somalia.Since routing the Union of Islamic Courts in December in 2006, both Ethiopia and Somalia's transitional government have been combating a fierce insurgency campaign.  In this campaign, government official, tribal elders, police forces, and civilians continue to be targets of violence.
Insurgents detonated a bomb just outside of a crowded tea shop in southern Thailand's restive Yala province.  Seven people were wounded after explosives hidden under a chair went off in front of the shop.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Gunmen shot and killed the mayor of Hettin neighborhood, Mohammed Al Rubaiee, the city of Hillah, south of Baghdad.  Attacks on prominent politicians and members of the Iraqi government are common in Iraq.
Unidentified gunmen kidnapped the seventy year old mother of a federal lawmaker in the Niger Delta.  There were no reports of any ransom demands.  Kidnappings are extremely common in the Niger Delta.
A suicide car bomber drove his vehicle into a police patrol in Fallujah, killing two policemen and injuring four others.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
A bomb exploded, damaging a district police chief's car in an attack in Bodal village of Zana Khan district. The police chief escaped unhurt.
Gunmen shot and killed Ahmed al-Mashhadani.  The victim served as an advisor to Adnan al-Dulaimi, a senior Sunni politician.
An explosive device was detonated by unknown insurgents at the campaign headquarters of a pre-Uribe candidate for governor in Valle del Cauca. There were no injuries and only minor damage. The attack is attributed to members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC).
Gunmen attacked police forces who were guarding Al Mamoun Intermediate School in west Baghdad's Mamoun neighborhood.  Two police officers, along with two gunmen were killed in the attack.
A roadside bomb struck a civilian minibus just outside of Baqubah, killing three people and wounding ten others.  The attack occurred on the major road in the city, which lies roughly sixty-five kilometers north of Baghdad.  Recently, Iraq has seen a wave of attacks against civilian buses.
Journalist Alisher Saipov was shot and killed at point blank range outside his office in Osh, Kyrgystan on the evening of October 24. Saipov reported for Voice of America's Uzbek language service on sensitive political issues throughout Central Asia. According to the Kyrgyz police, he may have had links with banned islamic groups, such as the Hezb-e Tahrir party and the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan as well as Uzbek opposition party leaders.
Two bombings on the southeastern edge of Baghdad killed nine and wounded twenty-three in total.  The bombings targeted nearby construction workers, government employees, and local vendors who were traveling into the capital.  Included among those killed were three policemen working nearby.  The two blasts went off at roughly seven a.m. and occurred roughly thirty yards apart from each other.
A roadside bomb struck a crowded minibus in Mogadishu's Yaqshiid District near Kaah Hotel.  Only three of the passengers survived the attack.  There were no Ethiopian, Ugandan, or Somali forces in the area at the time of the attack.  Somalia has seen an increasing number of remote-detonated bombings in areas heavily populated with civilians.Since routing the Union of Islamic Courts in December in 2006, both Ethiopia and Somalia's transitional government have been combating a fierce insurgency campaign.  In this campaign, government official, tribal elders, police forces, and civilians continue to be targets of violence.
Insurgents set fire to Rangae train station in restive southern Thailand.  Arson attacks are common throughout southern Thailand.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A car bomb was detonated on a highway in Caqueta. The Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) are being blamed for the attack, which did not result in any injuries.
A series of roadside bombs struck a convoy of truck drivers passing through Adhaim, a town roughly fifty-three kilometers north of Baquba.  According to reports, all of the drivers were Kurdish, and they were transporting supplies to Iraqi and U.S. army bases in the area.
A roadside bomb attack struck a police patrol in Diwaniyah City as it was returning from a mission, killing two officers and wounding three others.  Attacks on police forces are common in Iraq.
Terrorists tossed a hand grenade into a movie theater at the Sinai Junction in Mogadishu, injuring eleven civilians, two of whom sustained very serious injuries.  Grenade attacks on cinemas in Somalia are common.  Insurgents have been targeting them because they believe that they violate Islamic law.Since routing the Union of Islamic Courts in December in 2006, both Ethiopia and Somalia's transitional government have been combating a fierce insurgency campaign.  In this campaign, government official, tribal elders, police forces, and civilians continue to be targets of violence.
Gunmen with the Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta (MEND) attacked an oil installation in the Niger Delta.  The attack resulted in the kidnapping of six expatriate workers all employed by ENI, an Italian oil firm.  The victims were all either Polish or Indian, with exception of one Nigerian. The Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta later claimed responsibility for the attack.
In an exchange of fire and bombs between Bhumi Uchhed Pratirodh Committee [Committee for the Resistance to Eviction from Land] (BUPC) members and Communist Party of India - Marxist (CPI-M) activists, one person was killed and another was injured. The BUPC claimed the two were BUPC members. The violence occurred while a bandh [general strike] in opposition to land acquisition activities for a special economic zone in Nandigram block of East Midnapore district was being observed. The BUPC is leading the opposition effort. The CPI-M is the leading party in West Bengal's ruling coalition.
A bomb placed in a garbage outside a restaurant detonated, killing eight and wounding thirteen others.  Among those killed was an Iraqi police officer.  NOTE: According to the DPA report on this article, there were also several policemen among the wounded.
A roadside bomb struck a police patrol in Al-Iskandariyah district, north of Hillah. The attack killed one officer and wounded six others.  Attacks on police patrols are common in Iraq.
Five villagers were abducted and shot dead by suspected Maoists in Boda village in Jharkand state. Jharkand police spokesman told AFP that the five were killed by Maoist rebels who had charged them with being police informers and involved in coal smuggling. The attack comes after 18 people were killed in an ambush in another remote village in Jharkand state. About 16 of the state's 19 districts are facing a Maoist rebellion that officials say has spread to half of India's 29 states.
A suicide bomber attacked a major bus terminal in Kirkuk that transports people from the city further north to Iraq's Kurdish region.  The explosion caused a massive fire and set fifteen cars ablaze.  In addition, it claimed the lives of eight people and wounded at least twenty-six others.  The attack took place in a Kurdish region of the city.
Militants blew up an office used by supporters of Muqtada al-Sadr, an extremely influential Shiite cleric in Baghdad's Hurriya neighborhood.  No one was hurt in the attack. Recently, al-Sadr has suspended the activities of his powerful Mahdi army, but there are reports that some rogue elements are still operating.
Missiles were launched at Herat airport at night on October 29. The commander of the Border Brigade Number 4 asserted that the target of the attack was a police training camp to the east of the airport. A self-proclaimed local Taliban leader claimed responsibility for the attack, saying that target was the International Security Assistance Force military base located at the airport. The missile attack caused no damage.According to Radio Sahar, this attack was the fourth time the airport has come under attack.
Gunmen abducted Sulaiman Mustafa, a professor at Diyala University, from his home in Baqubah's Hay Al Thubat neighborhood.Attacks on professors and educational institutions are frequent in Iraq, as militants attempt to disrupt the country's reconstruction.
A suicide bomber rode his bicycle into a crowd outside a police recruiting center in Baquba and detonated his explosives, killing twenty-nine and wounding at least nineteen more.  According to reports, most of the victims were struck by the ball bearings that the bomber had packed into his vest.  One bystander thought that the bombing was an inside job because the attacker penetrated the heavily fortified police area so easily.  This allegation is consistent with a number of other reports that find that the Iraqi police forces to be corrupt, incompetent, and infiltrated with various militant factions fighting in Iraq.Attacks on police forces are common in Iraq.
A man blew himself up at a police checkpoint outside of the residence of General Tariq Majid, chairman of the joint chiefs of staff of Pakistan and less than half a kilometer from Pakistani president Pervez Musharraf's army office. Three policemen were among the seven people killed. Police said that women and children aboard a passing minibus were also killed and wounded. According to a report by Agence France Presse, Musharraf had been meeting  provincial governors and chief ministers to discuss Pakistan's deteriorating security situation ahead of elections due in January. The attack comes less than two weeks after a suicide attack in Karachi killed 139 people during a procession to welcome home former premier Benazir Bhutto.
A bomb placed inside a minibus in central Baghdad's Alawi bus terminal detonated, killing one civilian and wounding four others.  Attacks on transportation networks are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.  Recently, Iraq has seen a spate of attacks on minibuses.
Police found twenty decapitated bodies that were still bleeding in Gsarin village, just outside of Baqubah.  One of the bodies was believed to have been a tribal leader.  This attack more than likely had sectarian motivations.
Insurgents detonated a series of bombs inside ten karaoke restaurants in southern Thailand's restive Narathiwat province.  Five people were wounded in the attacks, but there were no reports of any fatalities.  NOTE: A November 2, 2007 report published The Nation later stated that one person died and four were injured.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
A roadside bomb exploded near a policeman and an off-duty soldier, killing both of them on the main road in Tuz Khurmato.  Attacks on police forces are common in Iraq.
Gunmen attacked a police checkpoint in the town of Yaiji, just north of Kirkuk.  One officer was killed and two others were wounded.  Attacks on police forces are common in Iraq.
Unidentified gunmen shot and wounded a village head in a drive-by shooting in southern Thailand's restive Pattani province.  The victim sustained wound in his leg, but survived.  Islamic insurgents are suspected as drive-by shootings remain a key tactic in their low-level insurgency.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2000 people have perished from the violence.
Gunmen attacked a police patrol in Baghdad's southern Sidadiyah neighborhood, wounding one police officer and three civilians.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
Police discovered the body of Sabri Abdul-Jabar, a professor at a university in Kirkuk, who was kidnapped two days earlier in a town near Kirkuk.  Attacks on educational institutions in general, and students and teachers in particular, are frequent in Iraq.
Gunmen opened fire on two students returning from school in a village near Tuz Khurmatu.  One of the students was killed and one was injured.  Attacks on educational institutions in general, and students and teachers in particular, are frequent in Iraq.  This attack in particular may have had sectarian motivations.
A roadside bomb struck a police patrol in Mahaweel, killing one officer and wounding another.  Attacks on police forces are common in Iraq.
Dr. Jabbar Yasir Al Maiyahi, the president of Wasit University, survived an assassination attempt when unidentified gunmen attempted to shoot him while he was inspecting one of the university's new buildings.  Attacks on educational institutions in general, and students and teachers in particular, are frequent in Iraq.
Two suicide bombers drove a car and a truck into a police checkpoint in Mosul, wounding fourteen people, eight of which were police officers.  The blasts occurred in western Mosul's Bab Sinjar neighborhood.  Attacks on police forces are common throughout Iraq.
Gunmen kidnapped the wife of a police officer in Kut.  Attacks on police and their families are extremely common in Iraq.
A remote-detonated bomb targeted civilians near the Green Zone in Baghdad, wounding two of them.  This attack may have had sectarian motivations.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a sixty-year old man in southern Thailand's restive Narathiwat province.  The victim was an alleged police informant.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
A director general in Baghdad's municipality, Aati Ali Sultan, was shot and killed inside of his car by gunmen in Baghdad's Ghadeer district.  His killers fled the scene of the attack.  Attacks on members of the Iraqi government are extremely common.
Gunmen stopped a car transporting a principal and several teachers in Kirkuk.  They then abducted the principal, letting the rest of the teachers go.  Attacks on educational institutions in general, and students and teachers in particular, are frequent in Iraq.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a police officer in Mogadishu's northern Suqbaad neighborhood.  According to newspaper accounts, gunmen shot him twice in his head, took his weapon, and ran.  Attacks on police forces are common throughout Somalia.Since routing the Union of Islamic Courts (UIC) in December in 2006, both Ethiopia and Somalia's transitional government have been combating a fierce insurgency campaign being waged by Islamic militants affiliated with the (UIC).
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a Muslim student in southern Thailand's restive Pattani province.  Islamic insurgents are suspected as they frequently target students and education officials.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
Police discovered the bodies of two decapitated policemen buried in the town of Dhuluyia.  Attacks on police forces are common in Iraq.
Gunmen shot and killed six police off-duty officers and torched their bodies western Mosul.  The officers were on their way to way to work when gunmen ambushed their car and executed all six officers.  They then proceeded to burn their bodies and set fire to the car that was carrying them.  Attacks on police forces are extremely common in Iraq.
A sniper shot and killed the son of a Mizher al-Sheikhli, a  member of the political bureau of the Islamic part, in Baghdad's Dora neighborhood.  Attacks on members of the Iraqi government are common in Iraq.
A bomb blast in southern Thailand's restive Pattani province killed Police Captain Cana Patarat on Wednesday.  His body was blown four hundred meters into a canal from which it was retrieved two days later.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
On November 8, 2007, the Animal Liberation Front (ALF) attacked three Wachovia Bank locaions in Laguna Woods, California.   One attack involved exploded a small bomb. In a communique, ALF claims that they dropped a small incendiary device into the after-hours deposit queue of the Laguna Woods branch.  They also threatened that unless Wachovia Bank sold their shares in Huntingdon Life Sciences (HLS), a company known to test on animals, there would be more attacks.  A Los Angeles Time article reported that ALF managed to succeed in that Wachovia Bank reportedly sold all of their stock in Huntingdon Life Sciences.
A roadside car bomb struck a police commando patrol in Fallujah, killing six officers and wounding two others.  Among those killed were two senior officers, one of whom served as the chief of the al-Walid police station.  Attacks on police forces are common in Iraq.NOTE: The Reuters roundup reported that three people were killed and five were injured.
A suicide car bomber detonated his car outside of the offices of the Kurdistan Democratic Party in Mosul.  The attack killed at least one person and wounded five others.  This was the second at on the political party in as many days.  On Wednesday, the group's offices were damaged in Kirkuk.
Two separate improvised explosive device attacks occurred near Khaniqeen in Diyala province.  The attacks killed three police officers and wounded three others.  Attacks on police forces are common in Iraq.
An improvised explosive device struck an employee of an oil company.  The explosion caused damage to the man's house, but he emerged unscathed.  Attacks on oil installations and oil workers are common in Iraq.
A suicide bomber struck the home of Sheikh Fayez Elewi Mizri, a tribal leader opposed to al-Qaeda.  The attack also claimed the lives of four other sheikhs, all of whom were part of the Diyala Awakening Council.A tribal awakening council is a group of sheiks and local tribal leaders, predominantly Sunnis, who have recently allied with U.S. forces in an attempt to oust al-Qaeda in Iraq and other extremists from their neighborhoods.  Recently, insurgents have stepped up attacks against these bodies in attempt to undermine and intimidate them.  Meanwhile, the U.S. heralds them as signs of progress in Iraq.
Militants detonated a bomb near the Kilani gas station in central Baghdad, wounding three.NOTE: The DPA write-up lumped the fatalities and injuries totals from this attack in with another attack.  The Xinhua write-up listed three people injured.
An explosive device comprised of a saucepan containing five kilos of chloratite with a detonator cord and timer was found and defused at the law court in Getxo.  A person calling on behalf of the Basque Fatherland and Freedom (ETA) warned of the explosive device and timing of explosion.
Insurgents attempted to assassinate the city of Mosul's chief of police, Brigadier General Wathiq al-Hamadni, with a roadside bomb attack.  The attack failed, and no casualties were reported.  Attacks on police forces are common throughout Iraq.
Five people were wounded when a booby-trapped car detonated near a police housing center in Tizi Ouzou.  The explosion, which took place very early in the morning, was followed by armed clashes between security forces and nearby gunmen.Algeria has seen a spate of attacks against police forces, government officials, and civilians by Al Qaeda in the Land of the Islamic Maghreb, an Islamist organization that was formerly known as the Salafist Group for Preaching and Combat (GSPC).
Unknown gunmen fired upon the car of Dr. Haitham Abdel-Salam, a professor at the University of Kirkuk.  The attack killed both Dr. Abdel-Salam as well as another passenger in the car.  In addition to their deaths, a third person was wounded.  Attacks on educational institutions in general, and students and teachers in particular, are frequent in Iraq.
Three Russian-speaking men who worked on the construction of a re-broadcasting tower were shot to death in the center of Nazran, Ingushetia. Unidentified gunmen opened fire with sub-machine guns from a Zhiguli car.Attacks against police, officials, and ethnically non-Ingush residents continue to undermine stability in Ingushetia. Russian media generally attribute the attacks to Arab jihadists. Others accuse Russian federal forces of randomly assaulting and abducting local Ingush residents in response to insurgent attacks, thereby engendering local resentment.
A police officer was killed along with a civilian in a bomb attack in Baqubah's Mandali neighborhood.  The blast, which also wounded two others, was followed by an exchange of gunfire between gunmen and police.  Attacks on police forces are common throughout Iraq.
A roadside bomb targeted the convoy of Kirkuk's deputy police chief.  Brig. Sarhad Qadir emerged unharmed after the attack.  However, three of his guards were wounded.  The attack took place in western Kirkuk only thirty minutes after another attack on a prominent police officer in the city.  Attacks on police forces are common throughout Iraq.
A group of Taliban fighters attacked a school in Koh-e Sinn area of Sayd Karam district in Paktia province, killing a teacher. Police arrived on the scene and a clash ensued, leaving two police officers and two insurgents dead.
Unidentified gunmen opened fire on a car carrying a traffic policeman and a police dog specialist. The traffic policeman died from his wounds; the dog specialist suffered multiple wounds of varying degrees of severity.The attack occurred in the village of Pokrovskoye in Dagestan's Khasavyurtovskiy district.Violence, ethnic tension, and feuding among criminal gangs throughout Dagestan and the other Northern Caucasian Russian republics continue to undermine social, political, and economic stability in the region. Victims of local violence tend to be members of local police forces, but also include Dagestani militants, civilians, and federal servicemen and officials.
A vehicle carrying the security commander of Dawlatabad district in Fariab province hit a mine planted on a road. The commander was returning to Fariab province from a visit to tribal elders in the Khanabad area of Kunduz province. He was accompanied by police guards. Neither the security commander nor his guards were injured. The Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack and its spokesman told Afghan Islamic Press that the mine had destroyed the vehicle.
A suicide bomber struck a funeral of a Sunni sheikh, killing the head of the tribe and wounding ten others in the attack.  Wearing a vest full of explosives, the bomber infiltrated their funeral in Iskandariyah, a town south of Baghdad.  In addition to the physical bomber, a second explosion rocked the funeral in the form of a car bomb outside the service.  This attack may have had sectarian motivations.
A roadside bomb struck a civilian car in Tala Abass area in Diyala province.  According to newspaper accounts, the roadside bomb was targeting that specific civilian's car.  Attacks on public areas are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Unknown gunmen kidnapped Muntadhar al-Zeidi, a reporter, in central Baghdad's Bab al-Sharqi neighborhood.  Al-Zeidi had been working for the al-Baghdadiyah satellite channel.  Attacks on journalists are common throughout Iraq.
A roadside bomb targeted an oil well near Kirkuk.  There were no reported casualties and no reports of any damage to the well.  Attacks on oil infrastructure are common in Iraq.
The Taliban executed five kidnapped policemen in Dezor village of Dehrawud district in Urozgan province, according to police officials. The Urozgan police chief said that their bodies  were found hanging in trees in the village. He added that the Taliban had kidnapped a number of policemen from various check posts in Dehrawud district about two months back.  He also said that others among the kidnapped policemen had been executed earlier.
A roadside bomb was detonated outside a high school in Baghdad's al-Jadida district, wounding two nearby civilians.  Attacks on educational institutions in general, and students and teachers in particular, are frequent in Iraq.
A booby-trapped car exploded in Baghdad's Karrada neighborhood, killing ten civilians and wounding twenty others. The attack, which took place in Al-Hurriyah Square, targeted the convoy of one of the deputies of the minister of finance.  The deputy minister escaped unhurt.  Attacks on important national and local political leaders are common in Iraq.NOTE: The UPI report the next day upped the death toll to ten.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed an elderly Muslim couple in their home in southern Thailand's restive Yala province.  Agence France Presse states that southern Thailand's separatist rebels are suspected.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
The Taliban beheaded three truck drivers near Darra Adamkhel in Orakzai agency in the North-West Frontier Province. The Taliban kidnapped them on the evening of November 18 when they were passing through the Darra Adamkhel bazaar to neighboring Kurram agency. According to Dawn, the beheadings appear to be revenge for sectarian killings in Parachinar in Kurram agency.
Insurgents targeted the convoy of Abu Ahmed al-Basri, an advisor to Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki, with a remote-detonated explosive device.  No injuries were reported, and al-Basri survived the attack.  Attacks on prominent local and national political figures are common in Iraq.
A roadside bomb exploded near a small bus in eastern Baghdad's Baladiyat district.  The attack killed one civilian and wounded seven others.  Attacks on transportation networks are frequent in Iraq and often have sectarian motivations.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a husband and wife who were leaving a rubber plantation in southern Thailand's restive Narathiwat province.  Attacks on the rubber industry are common in Thailand as it is a key part of the country's economy.  In fact, this was the second such attack in the same day.  Islamic insurgents are suspected as drive-by shootings remain a key tactic in their low-level insurgency.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
A car bomb struck a police patrol in Baghdad's Baya district, killing two people and wounding seven others.  Attacks on police forces are common throughout Iraq.
Unknown gunmen shot and killed two civilians in western Baghdad's Hay Dragh neighborhood.  Newspaper accounts implied that the gunmen were targeting these civilians specifically.
A suicide truck bomber detonated his vehicle outside the home of a tribal leader in Mosul who was overseeing local policing efforts in his neighborhood.  According to newspaper accounts, the sheikh's security guards opened fire on the driver, killing him and forcing him to detonate his explosives early, ultimately preventing greater loss of life.  Attacks on tribal leaders who cooperate with the Iraqi government or the U.S. military are common throughout Iraq.
Taliban insurgents shot and killed two policemen in Yousfkhel district of Paktia province in the morning. The security chief in the provincial police headquarters said that the policemen were guarding the tankers supplying fuel to the foreign military forces in the province.
Insurgents lobbed two mortars into the Green Zone, which houses important U.S. military personnel, major embassies, and much of the Iraqi federal government.  There was no report of any casualties or property damage.  Attacks on the Green Zone are common in Iraq.
Police discovered the decapitated body of a university professor from Tikrit in Mosul.  Attacks on educational institutions in general, and students and teachers in particular, are frequent in Iraq.
Unknown gunmen on a motorbike shot and killed an interpreter near his home in Kut.  Attacks on individuals who work with U.S. forces or the Iraqi government are common in Iraq.
(2nd of 2 attacks)Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a pickup truck full of three people in southern Thailand's restive Pattani province.  Four gunmen on motorbikes shot Piphat Nisawaanutharapan along with two female colleagues at close range with a M16 rifle and a pistol.  Following this attack, they planted a bomb inside the truck.  The insurgents then detonated this bomb as forensic experts arrived on the scene of the shooting.  The resulting explosion severely injured one officer.  Authorities believe that the bomb was detonated remotely.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
A suicide car bomber drove his vehicle into a police patrol and detonated it, killing five people and wounding ten others.  Of the five killed, two were police officers.  A number of cars were set on fire and a number nearby buildings were damaged in the attack.  This attack was coordinated with a second attack in which a remote-detonated bomb was set off as more police forces arrived on the scene to inspect the cars in the original blast.  This second attack claimed two lives and left eleven others wounded.  The two people killed were both police officers, while the eleven wounded were all civilians.Attacks on police forces, including coordinated attacks such as this, are common in Iraq.
A parked car bomb exploded near the Atta Allah mosque, killing two worshippers and wounding two others. Attacks on important religious institutions are common in Iraq.
A suicide car bomber rammed his car into a police patrol in central Mosul's Al-Baath neighborhood, killing four police officers and fourteen other people nearby.  This was the second suicide bomb attack in Mosul that day.Attacks on police forces are common throughout Iraq.
Militants planted a bomb packed with ball bearings in a box of small birds and detonated it at a crowded pet market in Baghdad.  The attack killed at least fifteen people and wounded at least fifty-six others, making it the deadliest attack Iraq has seen in over two months.  Attacks on markets are common in Iraq, but attacks of this magnitude had not been seen since late summer.The attack targeted a popular market that had only recently began attracting swaths of tourists as the security situation improved.  Shortly after the attack, the U.S. blamed Shiite insurgents who had broken away from Muqtada al-Sadr's Mahdi army as being responsible.  In addition to this claim, the U.S. also accused of Iran of backing these militants.
A parked car bomb exploded near a police patrol in Shurqat, a city northwest of Baghdad.  The attack killed one police officer and wounded fifteen others.  Attacks on police forces are common throughout Iraq.
A police patrol was rocked by a car bomb explosion in Samarra, a city north of Baghdad.  The blast killed three police officers and wounded at least eleven others.  Attacks on police forces are common throughout Iraq.
Unidentified individuals beheaded a man by the name of Nabi in Jaghato district in Wardag province in central Afghanistan. The man is claimed to have been killed on the charge of spying for government forces. According to Muhammad Karim, who lives in the area in which the attack occurred, Nabi was 'involved in several criminal cases, and the locals were fed up with him.' Karim said that the attackers stormed into Nabi's house in Chino village on the night of November 25. The administrative chief of Jaghato district believes that the attack was committed by the Taliban.
Unknown gunmen shot and killed an employee working for the local Basra criminal court in Basra as he was leaving the building.  Attacks on government employees are frequent in Iraq.
A parked car bomb detonated in a parking lot near a major medical center in Baghdad, killing at least nine people and wounding thirty-one others.  The attack took place in a crowded section of central Baghdad's Bab al-Muadham neighborhood, which houses both the Health Ministry and the central morgue. Large-scale bombings of civilians have quieted somewhat since the surge, but this was the second large bombing in a crowded public area in the past two days.
Unidentified gunmen assaulted a police station and a police vehicle in Baydhabo, killing one and wounding eleven others.  The assailants used hand grenades in their assault, a typical tactic in Somalia's ongoing insurgency.  The deceased was a civilian woman nearby the scene of the attack.  Civilians are clearly bearing the brunt of Somalia's conflict.Since routing the Union of Islamic Courts (UIC) in December in 2006, both Ethiopia and Somalia's transitional government have been combating a fierce insurgency campaign being waged by Islamic militants affiliated with the (UIC).
Three M-57 hand grenades were thrown into a coffee bar early Tuesday morning in Tuzla. The bar, Madona, is owned by a local policeman.Only one grenade exploded, damaging windows and equipment in the bar. Unofficial reports indicate that the grenades may have been thrown by individuals connected to a criminal  group in retaliation for the bar owner's involvement in the arrests of members of the group.
Unknown gunmen shot and killed Ahmed Hassan, the mayor of Al-Zihour neighborhood in Tikrit.  According to police reports, his killers used silencers on their guns.  Attacks on important local and national politicians are common in Iraq.
The Mujahideen Youth Movement claimed credit for an attack against a Somali police headquarters.  According to a claim posted on their website, the group hurled grenades at the station resulting in the deaths of two police officers.  Attacks on police forces are common throughout Somalia.Since routing the Union of Islamic Courts (UIC) in December in 2006, both Ethiopia and Somalia's transitional government have been combating a fierce insurgency campaign being waged by Islamic militants affiliated with the (UIC).
Two grenade explosions were reported from different parts of Herat city. The explosions occurred after another explosion took place in front of attorney Maria Bashir's house, injuring two policemen. The Taliban spokesman claimed that Taliban fighters were responsible for the explosions.
(2nd of 6 attacks)Insurgents planted six bombs throughout southern Thailand's restive Yala province and detonated them.  The second bomb failed to detonate.  It was planted inside of a house along Tethsaban 6 road and was discovered an hour after the first blast.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
(6th of 6 attacks)Insurgents planted six bombs throughout southern Thailand's restive Yala province and detonated them.  The sixth blast took place at Yala Changlee school.  According to the Bangkok Post, there were no casualties in this attack.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
Unknown gunmen opened fire on Hamid Ibrahim, the head of Hibhib police forces in Baquba.  While Ibrahim escaped the attack unscathed, the gunmen wounded two of his guards.  Attacks on police forces are common throughout Iraq.
A car bomb detonated near a police vehicle in Al Shirqat, a city in Ninawa province.  Four police officers were killed in the attack.  Attacks on police forces are common in Iraq.
Unknown gunmen shot and killed a restaurant owner in Kirkuk.  Attacks on restaurants, especially those that cater to foreigners are common in Iraq.
An improvised explosive device detonated near a police patrol in northern Baghdad's Al-Shaab neighborhood, killing three policemen.  Attacks on police forces are common in Iraq.
A suicide car bomber detonated his vehicle near the al-Madain Hospital in Baghdad's Salaman Pak area, killing at least one civilian and wounding four others.  The attack took place along the main road that links Baghdad to the south of the country.  It has often been the scene of sectarian violence and terrorist attacks.
Police found and defused an explosive device containing screws and bolts. The device, the equivalent of 1.8 kg of TNT, was found at the entrance to an apartment bloc in Dagestan's Untsukulskiy District. Law enforcement officials speculate that the bomb may have been an assassination attempt on former Dagestani MP Gazimagomed Magomedov, whose apartment is located on the third floor of the building where the device was found.Violence, ethnic tension, and feuding among criminal gangs throughout Dagestan and the other Northern Caucasian Russian republics continue to undermine social, political, and economic stability in the region. Victims of local violence tend to be members of local police forces, but also include Dagestani militants, civilians, and federal servicemen and officials.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives laden car near a Diyala Highway Patrol chief.  Newspaper accounts did not provide any tolls for either fatalities or injuries.  Attacks on police forces are common in Iraq.
A car bomb exploded next to a Shiite mosque in central Baghdad, killing one civilian and injuring at least three others.  The blast damaged several nearby buildings and destroyed four nearby civilian cars.
The Mujahideen Youth Movement posted a statement on their website, claiming credit for the assassination of Abdullah Boke, a local leader.  Mr. Boke was serving as the president of Hawatako neighborhood when he was killed in al-Bakarah market.Since routing the Union of Islamic Courts (UIC) in December in 2006, both Ethiopia and Somalia's transitional government have been combating a fierce insurgency campaign being waged by Islamic militants affiliated with the (UIC).
A suicide attack in the Kashrod district of Nimroz province in southwestern Afghanistan killed three people and injured eight. Standing in front of a mosque, the bomber rushed toward a vehicle belonging to the local highway police, detonating a belt carrying explosives. The provincial police chief told Pajhwok Afghan News that two policemen and a pedestrian were killed and three policemen were among the eight wounded. The attack occurred at 4:30 in the afternoon.Attacks on police personnel are common in Afghanistan.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed four policemen during an ambush in Riyadh.  Attacks on police forces are common in Iraq.
A roadside bomb detonated near a group of police officers in Baghdad's Mansour district.  The attack killed two of the officers and left four others wounded.  Attacks on police forces are common in Iraq.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed an intelligence official working for Diwaniyah city's intelligence office in front of his home.  Attacks on government employees are common in Iraq.
A remote-detonated bomb exploded just outside of a crowded restaurant in southern Thailand's restive Pattani province.  The attack occurred as insurgents used a mobile phone to detonate a bomb hidden inside of a motorcycle outside of a porridge restaurant in the late evening.  Two people died at the scene of the attack, and four died later in the hospital.  Twenty others were injured.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
A booby-trapped car bomb exploded in a crowded market in Baquba near a bus station, killing five men and wounding fifteen others.  Among those wounded were three women, one child, and one policeman.  This attack comes amidst a wave of large attacks that have disrupted the relative lull in violence across the country.
Members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) killed five and kidnapped 20 peasants in the jungles in Choco province after attacking a lumber operation in the region.
A roadside bomb targeted a police patrol just outside of Fallujah, killing one officer and wounding three others.  Attacks on police forces are common in Iraq.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a forty-three year old man in a drive-by shooting at a tea shop in southern Thailand's restive Narathiwat province.  In addition, another patron of the teashop was wounded in the attack.  Islamic insurgents are suspected as drive-by shootings remain a key tactic in their low-level insurgency.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
A roadside bomb detonated in Rashad, a small town south of Kirkuk, wounding five police officers.  Attacks on police forces are common in Iraq.
A bomb went off at the Government Girls Middle School in Ahmed Shah village near the city of Peshawar in northwest Afghanistan on the night of December 8. The building was damaged, but there were no casualties. Prior to the attack, teachers and students at the school had received several letters asking them to wear veils. This is the second attack in the Matni police station's police region in two weeks. A blast had damaged the Government Girls Primary School in Sher Bahadur village on November 26.
A roadside bomb detonated near a police patrol in southwestern Baghdad's neighborhood of Dora.  The attack killed one police officer and wounded five others who were nearby.  Attacks on police forces are common in Iraq.
A small homemade bomb detonated just outside of an elections office on the island of Jolo in the Philippines.  Hidden in a trash can outside of the office, the bomb did not result in any injuries or casualties.  The explosion damaged the building itself, but did not injure any people.
A roadside bomb targeting the motorcade of the head of the council for Nineveh went off in an area just  north of Mosul.  No one was injured in the explosion.  Attacks on prominent local and national political figures are common in Iraq.
Two unidentified gunmen shot and killed a government official overseeing the police training college in Xamarjajab District in Banaadir region.  Attacks both on government officials and  police forces are common in Somalia.Since routing the Union of Islamic Courts (UIC) in December in 2006, both Ethiopia and Somalia's transitional government have been combating a fierce insurgency campaign being waged by Islamic militants affiliated with the (UIC).
Unidentified individuals caused a explosion in a gas pipeline in Balochistan province on the afternoon of December 10. They planted an explosive device near Mian Ghundi, some 45 km from Quetta, the provincial capital. According to Sui Southern Gas Company, the blast affected gas supply to parts of Mastung and Kalat districts.
A suicide car bomber rammed his explosive-laden vehicle into a police checkpoint just outside the offices of two prominent Sunni politicians.  The attack, which took place in western Baghdad's Harthiyah neighborhood, killed two police officers and wounded twelve other people.  Attacks on police forces are common in Iraq.
An improvised explosive device detonated near a police patrol in western Baghdad's Yarmouk neighborhood, wounding two police officers.  Attacks on police forces are common in Iraq.
Taliban militants attacked Sang Atish police post near Qala-e Naw, capital of Badghis province in western Afghanistan. The attack occurred around 10 pm and the ensuing firefight lasted three hours, leaving five militants and two police officers injured. Attacks on the police are common in Afghanistan.
An anti-al Qaeda Sunni tribal sheikh was gunned down along with his nephew during a drive-by shooting in Tal Afar, a city far northwest of Baghdad.  Attacks on anti-al Qaeda sheikhs have become increasingly common throughout Iraq.
A roadside bomb detonated near a police patrol in Tuz Khromatu, killing four police officers.  Among those killed was one police colonel.  In addition, four others were injured in the attack.  Attacks on police forces are common in Iraq.
Unknown gunmen ambushed a police vehicle on the morning of December 12, killing two policemen in the eastern part of Khost city in eastern Afghanistan's Khost province. After killing the policemen, the attackers set the vehicle on fire. Attacks on the police are common in Afghanistan.
The Iraqi army discovered the bodies of two local tribesmen, fighting against al Qaeda as part of a tribal awakening council.  A tribal awakening council is a group of sheiks and local tribal leaders, predominantly Sunnis, who have recently allied with U.S. forces in an attempt to oust al-Qaeda in Iraq and other extremists from their neighborhoods.  Recently, insurgents have stepped up attacks against these bodies in attempt to undermine and intimidate them.  Meanwhile, the U.S. heralds them as signs of progress in Iraq.
A policeman was injured when gunmen opened fire on his police patrol in Dora.  Dora is in southwest Baghdad.  Attacks on police forces are common in Iraq.
Two improvised explosive devices were thrown outside the Indian consulate in the city of Jalalabad in eastern Afghanistan. The explosions occurred late on the night of December 13. There were no casualties or damage. Afghan Islamic Press reported that a similar incident was reported several days before.
Unidentified individuals fired upon a bus in Shindand district of Herat province in southwestern Afghanistan. The driver and conductor were among the wounded. The bus was bound for Kabul. The attack occurred in the Azizabad area of Shindand district.
A bomb was detonated around noon on the fifth floor of the Justice Palace facilities in Santa Cruz. No injuries were reported in the wake of the blast.
Insurgents emerged from a house in Baaj west of Mosul and fired shots at a checkpoint. The checkpoint was run by an group of Awakening Council members. Three of those killed were attackers.
There was an attempted assassination on the governor of the Babil province. The governor was part of a convoy traveling to Baghdad. The governor survived the attack and no injuries were reported.
There were two attacks in the Baldruz area of the Diyala province. The attacks were targeted towards police and resulted in the deaths of two officers.
A gunman shot members of an Awakening Council in a market resulting in the death of three men and injuring four others. The attack occurred in the Mafraq neighborhood of Baquba.
A roadside bomb was detonated at 8am in Baghdad's Zafaraniyah neighborhood. The bomb injured two policemen and four civilians.
A suicide bomber using a vest packed with explosives detonated the vest in a caf in the Diyala province. The blast killed 17 and wounded another 30.
During a night attack in Mosul, gunmen attacked a home containing members of the Yazidi Kurdish, a religious minority group. The attack killed 7 and injured 2.
(3rd of 3 attacks)Islamic insurgents detonated bombs at three grocery stores in Narathiwat province.  The third bomb blast took place at a grocery store near the site of the second bomb blast in Rueso's fresh market. The shop owner was injured in this attack.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a forty-two year old deputy village chief in southern Thailand's restive Pattani province.  The country's southern Islamic separatists are suspected.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
A suicide bomber blew himself up at a center for volunteers with ties to local public committees in Baquba. The blast targeted Volunteer Iraqi Fighters. The blast killed 13 and wounded 8.
An afternoon attack using a roadside bomb occurred near the Madaen hospital. The blast injured five people and was likely targeted towards civilians.
Unknown armed men hit a police in the Al Zarga area to Kirkuk's south. The armed men were killed and two policemen were harmed.
Unknown gunmen murdered Nayif Muhammad Hadid, a police officer in Mosul. Mosul is located 225 miles Northwest of Baghdad.
A minivan bus that was loaded with explosives was detonated close to the office of Baghdad's Governor located close to the Green Zone housing western embassies and Iraq's government. The blast killed two people and injured another 6.
A bomb explosion rocked a barber shop in the Philippines city of Cotabato, a religiously mixed city that sits at the heart of the southern Philippine insurgency.  The bomb was made from a mortar shell, and its detonation left two people wounded.  One of the victims was a civil servant for the government.
A bomber loaded with explosives blew himself up around funeral mourners that were part of a procession of a funeral. There were four people murdered in the blast and 21 harmed. Baqouba is to Baghdad's Northeast.
In Salah Al-Din explosives were placed within a power station serving south Tikrit. The blast took down the power plant and led cut power to a majority the area. No one was harmed in the blast.
A gas station was the target of a car bomb in central Baghdad. The blast left injured and dead civilians but it is not clear how many. The blast occurred in the Bab al-Muazim area of central Baghdad.
A roadside bomb in Jalawla was detonated outside a health care center in the area. This bombing was one of four bombs detonated in Jalwala on the same day. No people were reported killed.
A bomb was placed and detonated close to the Musa Bin Naseer fuel station. The station is located in Karradah, a district in central Baghdad. The blast hurt two but resulted in no fatalities.
An Iraqi actor, Kudyyir Abu al-Abba was the target of an assassination attempt in the Kamsarah area of Baghdad. Al-Abba escaped harm after unknown gunmen began firing at him.
Ahmed al-Jobori the media officer of Mosul's police was attacked by unidentified armed men when in a convoy in the Qadisiyah neighborhood. Al-Jobori survived the assassination attempt but one of his guards was killed and one was injured. Two of the gunmen were also killed in the attack.
A group of unidentified gunmen attacked police officers in an area south of Baghdad. The attack killed on police officer, no other injuries were reported.
Four members of an Iraqi neighborhood patrol were killed and two others wounded when a suicide bomber wearing an explosive vest detonated the bomb. The blast occurred in the outskirts of northern Baghdad.
A police convoy was targeted by a roadside bomb in the  Zafaraniyah area of Baghdad close to the al-Kubaisi mosque. There were no fatalities but three police officers were injured.
Former Sri Lankan Minister and Tamilian lawmaker T. Maheswaran was shot dead on January 1, 2008 by unidentified assailants at a temple in the heart of Colombo. Maheswaran represented the Colombo district in Parliament. He survived a previous attempt on his life during the 2004 general elections. Five others were also injured in the shooting.
A suicide bomber detonated his explosives laden vehicle at a police station in Naciria, killing four and wounding at least twenty others.  Eight of those wounded were police officers.  Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb is suspected.Recently, Algeria has seen a spate of bloody suicide bombings.  This attack comes on the heels of a massive attack against the United Nations offices in Algiers that killed sixty-seven and wounded over one hundred.
On January 6, 2008 FARC rebels toppled an electricity pylon in Cauca Department.
Insurgents detonated a bomb in a crowded market in southern Thailand's restive Narathiwat province.  The bomb was attached to a stolen motorcycle and blew up amidst a crowd of over one hundred people.  However, only two women were harmed by the attack.  Both sustained minor injuries.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a thirty-year old religious teacher in southern Thailand's restive Yala province.  Attacks on religious figures are common in southern Thailand.  The country's southern Islamic separatists are suspected.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a thirty-four year old Muslim government official in southern Thailand's restive Yala province.  The country's southern Islamic separatists are suspected.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
Four unidentified gunmen opened fire on Abdikheyr Mohammed Jama, a journalist with Radio Galkayo, critically wounding him.  The attack, which took place in Bosasso, comes amidst a recent flurry of kidnappings and conflict in the northern quasi-autonomous region of Puntland.  Attacks on journalists are common throughout Somalia.  Last year, at least eight were murdered, according to Reporters without Border.Since routing the Union of Islamic Courts (UIC) in December in 2006, both Ethiopia and Somalia's transitional government have been combating a fierce insurgency campaign being waged by Islamic militants affiliated with the (UIC).
On January 12, 2008 a bomb attached to the wall of a Banque Populaire branch exploded causing minor damage and no injuries. The bank branch is located in Ajaccio, Corsica.There are no claims of responsibility. However, underground Corsican separatist movements have targeted French banks in the past who they blame for aiding in the appropriation of 'their land'.
An explosive charge killed six policemen, including one officer.  The attack occurred in the Balad District, north of Baghdad.  The blast was followed by an attack by unidentified gunmen near the Shrine of Sayyid Muhammad Bin-Ali al-Hadi.  A police patrol vehicle was also damaged in this incident.
On January 14, 2008 a grenade exploded under a vehicle belonging to the nascent Kosovo government in Suva (35 miles south of Pristina). The blast seriously injured all four occupants of the car.There were no claims of responsibility; however, the attack occurred in the run-up to Kosovo's deceleration of independence from Serbia.
Militants attacked the main luxury hotel in Afghanistan's capital, Kabul, killing 7 people and injuring 6 others. The Serena Hotel, which is popular with foreigners, is the main venue for top-level functions of the Afghan government, foreign embassies and businesses in Kabul. Four Afghans, two of whom were security guards, a Filipina employee of the hotel's health club, a Norwegian journalist and an American of undisclosed affiliation were killed in the attack. At the time, the Norwegian foreign minister was inside the hotel, however, he was unharmed. Shortly after 6pm, three men armed with suicide vests and assault rifles entered the hotel compound after opening fire on the guards standing at the gate and killing one. Another guard fired back and hit one of the attackers, who immediately detonated his explosives. The other two attackers moved toward the hotel building. One of them detonated his explosives outside the main door; the head of the National Security Directorate of Afghanistan said that the second attacker had either been too hasty or was afraid of being shot by the hotel's guards. The third attacker entered the hotel lobby and opened fire on guests and employees as he moved toward the health club, killing several people. He did not detonate his explosives and was found hiding in the hotel by Afghan authorities. Three others were arrested in connection with this attack, including the man who transported the attackers to the hotel, and two men who are suspected of providing accommodations to the attackers in the city. The Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack.
On January 15, 2008 a bomb was found on a major street in central Valparaiso. The bomb was comprised of an ammonium-based explosive, nails and other metallic shrapnel.The authorities were alerted to the presence of the bomb by anonymous tip. The tipster state the bomb had been planted in response to the oppression of the Mapuche residents in the Araucania region.
Insurgents detonated a large bomb strapped to a motorcycle in a morning market in southern Thailand's restive Yala province.  The attack left forty-four people injured, including six who sustained very serious injuries.  The perpetrators waited until the market was filled with shoppers at the food stalls before detonating the bomb.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
Insurgents with the Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta (MEND) tossed dynamite at the convoy of Sotoye Etomi, the Nigerian Ports Authority South East General Manager.  The attack killed the Etomi's driver and wounded two of the police escorts with convoy.  However, there were no reports of Etomi getting hurt.
Two moviegoers were injured when someone threw a hand grenade into a major cinema in Mogadishu.  Attacks on cinemas are common in Somalia, as are anonymous grenade attacks.Since routing the Union of Islamic Courts (UIC) in December in 2006, both Ethiopia and Somalia's transitional government have been combating a fierce insurgency campaign being waged by Islamic militants affiliated with the (UIC).
This is a series of bomb blasts that rocked Bhutan on January 20, 2008. The bomb blasts as the country was preparing to move to democracy by holding its first ever election on March 24. The fourth bomb blast occurred in the district of Dagana behind a house. No one was injured in the attack. No one claimed responsibility for the attack, but the police blamed one of the three militants organizations based in Nepal - the Bhutan Tiger Force, the Bhutan Maoists Party, and the Communist Party of Bhutan - to be behind the attacks.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed two local government employees in southern Thailand's restive Yala province.  Attacks on local government forces are common in southern Thailand's.  The region's Islamist separatists are suspected.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
On January 21, 2008 a bomb exploded outside the of a Banco BCI bank branch in Santiago. The blast caused no casualties and only minor damage. The Mapuche Indians claimed responsibility for the attack. The tribe is protesting the treatment of the Mapuche in Chile by the government.
Militants from Abu Sayyaf abducted a number of passengers on a commuter van in the town of Patikul.  They later freed all of them after realizing that one of the victims was a Muslim cleric.  There were no reports of any ransoms being paid.
On January 23, 2008 a homemade bomb was defused outside a real estate agents office and a branch of the Credit Agricole bank. Both business are located outside Bayonne in the Cambo-les-Bains.  There was no claim of responsibility for the attack; however, a note stating the Basque Country is not for sale was left at the scene.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a forty-year old Buddhist in a drive-by shooting in southern Thailand's restive Yala province.  Islamic insurgents are suspected as drive-by shootings remain a key tactic in their low-level insurgency.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a fifty-year old Muslim inside his home in southern Thailand's restive Yala province.  The country's southern Islamic separatists are suspected.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a village head in a drive-by shooting in southern Thailand's restive Yala province.  Islamic insurgents are suspected as drive-by shootings remain a key tactic in their low-level insurgency.  Moreover, they frequently target prominent village leaders.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a fishmonger and wounded his colleague in southern Thailand's restive Pattani province.  Their assailants rode a motorcycle.  Islamic insurgents are suspected as drive-by shootings remain a key tactic in their low-level insurgency.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
Insurgents suspected to be part of Abu Sayyaf kidnapped a female trader in Sulu, the southern Philippines province.  There were no reports of kidnappers demanding ransom during this kidnapping.  The country has been in the throes of a low level insurgency with a number of Islamic insurgents.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a forty-seven year person in a drive-by shooting in southern Thailand's restive Yala province.  Islamic insurgents are suspected as drive-by shootings remain a key tactic in their low-level insurgency.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a local government official in a drive-by shooting in southern Thailand's restive Yala province.  Islamic insurgents are suspected as drive-by shootings remain a key tactic in their low-level insurgency.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed Abbas Muhammad Nur, the spokesman of Banaadir Region.  According to reports, Nur was attacked by four men armed with pistols in Mogadishu's Xamarweyne District.  The attack also left a civilian wounded.Since routing the Union of Islamic Courts (UIC) in December in 2006, both Ethiopia and Somalia's transitional government have been combating a fierce insurgency campaign being waged by Islamic militants affiliated with the UIC.
A roadside bomb targeting the police wounded five people including three policemen in western Baghdad.
At the Fort Railway Station, a main railway station in Colombo, a suicide bomb attack killed eleven people and injured 92. According to a police spokesman, a suspected female Tamil Tiger suicide bomber carried out the attack, as the train pulled into the station in the center of Colombo. The attack came as the government prepared to celebrate the nation's 60th anniversary.
A series of a dozen bombs exploded in the town of Rajbiraj, near a stadium where the Nepali Congress was organizing its election rally. According to police, the bombs were targeting the security personnel. 13 people were injured in the bomb blasts.  There were no fatalities. No group claimed responsibility for the attack.
A series of a dozen bombs exploded in the town of Rajbiraj, near a stadium where the Nepali Congress was organizing its election rally. According to police, the bombs were targeting the security personnel. 13 people were injured in the bomb blasts.  There were no fatalities. No group claimed responsibility for the attack.
A series of a dozen bombs exploded in the town of Rajbiraj, near a stadium where the Nepali Congress was organizing its election rally. According to police, the bombs were targeting the security personnel. 13 people were injured in the bomb blasts.  There were no fatalities. No group claimed responsibility for the attack.
A series of a dozen bombs exploded in the town of Rajbiraj, near a stadium where the Nepali Congress was organizing its election rally. According to police, the bombs were targeting the security personnel. 13 people were injured in the bomb blasts.  There were no fatalities. No group claimed responsibility for the attack.
Insurgents detonated explosives inside of a school in southern Thailand's restive Pattani province.  The attack left ten wounded, including an agricultural expert and a local government employee.  The attack took place as government officials and agricultural experts were releasing fish into the school's pond in a sustainable food policy program.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
Two civilians were wounded by a roadside bomb planted under their vehicle in Hurriya district of Baghdad.
On February 5, 2008 an explosive device was left at the home of a UCLA professor. The device caused minor damage and know one was injured. The motive for the attack is believed to revolve around the treatment of animals in UCLA laboratories. The Animal Liberation Front claimed credit for the attack on their website.
Two neighborhood policemen were killed after confronting a suicide bomber wearing an explosive belt. The incident took place in the north-western part of Baghdad.
Three women and a man were wounded when a roadside bomb exploded near their vehicle in Baqubah north-east of Baghdad.
Insurgents with the al-shabaab launched a series of grenade attacks in Bosasso, an area heavily populated by Ethiopian civilians.  The attacks killed twenty-two people and left over eighty others injured.  According to reports, the blasts took place within two minutes of each other.  They completely destroyed an entire neighborhood where Ethiopians live.  It should be noted that Ethiopia invaded Somalia in 2006.Since routing the Union of Islamic Courts (UIC) in December in 2006, both Ethiopia and Somalia's transitional government have been combating a fierce insurgency campaign being waged by Islamic militants affiliated with the UIC.
Two policemen were wounded when a roadside bomb targeted their vehicle in Mosul.
On the night of February 7, 2008 a 15kg bomb exploded next to the Bergara Court of Justice in Guipuzcoa Province in Basque Country. The fire department was warned that there would be an explosion at the courthouse. As a result they were able to establish a security perimeter leading to no deaths or injuries.ETA is believed to be responsible for the attack.
The Mujahideen Youth Movement claimed credit for shelling forces with the African Union present in Hadan.  In addition to the shelling the group claimed to have fired upon the forces with a light machine gun.  There were no reports of any casualties.Since routing the Union of Islamic Courts (UIC) in December in 2006, both Ethiopia and Somalia's transitional government have been combating a fierce insurgency campaign being waged by Islamic militants affiliated with the UIC.
Three awakening police members were killed by Al-Qaeda in their homes in Baqubah.Their bodies were later rigged with explosives and detonated after.
Early on February 8, 2008 a coordinated attack was carried out against four members of Hungary's Socialist Party. In each attack a petrol-bomb was thrown at the MPs home. There were no injuries in any of the attacks; however, each attack caused damage. One of the four attacks occurred in Kunhegyes, HungaryThe Arrows of Hungarians National Liberation Army claimed credit for the attack in a statement released later: The flames of Friday dawn should remind all traitors where the 'no' button is located. The 'no' button references an upcoming vote on a health-care bill.
Unknown militants detonated a bomb targeting the Shell Petroleum Development Company (SPDC), blowing up a pipeline, and spilling large quantities of oil.  The last time the region saw a wave of attacks on its oil installation was in 2006.  The Movement for the Emancipation of then Niger Delta (MEND) was not reported to be directly linked to the attack.
Three mayoralty's workers were killed and three others wounded when unidentified gunmen opened fire on them in the northern part of Baghdad.
Two policemen were killed and another 17 injured in a mortar attack on their base in Balad Ruz.
A roadside bomb targeting a neighborhood representative (Mukhtar) office in Hilla wounded four people.
A roadside bomb exploded near Al-Mansour gas station in Baghdad. Two civilians were wounded in the attack.
Gunmen kidnapped a foreign journalist and his translator in Basra. The journalist worked for CBS news. The attackers using two civilian cars abducted the two from their hotel in Basra.
Gunmen opened fire on a police patrol in Basra killing one officer and wounding two others.
Armed men assassinated Husham Hamdan in the  Al-Fadhil region of Baghdad. Hamdan was a journalist.
Two people were injured when a roadside bomb hit their vehicle in northern Fallujah.
The police chief of Ba'aj  and three of his body guards were wounded in roadside bomb attack. Ba'aj is a small town 90 miles west of Mosul.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed two Muslim men and wounded a woman who were en route to work at a rubber plantation in southern Thailand's restive Narathiwat province.  Attacks on the rubber industry are common in southern Thailand as it is an important sector in the country's economy.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
A bomb exploded at the office of Nepal Election Commission in Nepalgunj. No one was injured in the blast, according to police. A militant group based in Nepal's Terai plains - the Jantantrik Terai Mukti Morcha Jwala Singh (JTMM-J) claimed responsibility for the attack.
A child was injured when he picked up an improvised explosive device in Mahaweel near Hillah in Babil Province. The child was the only casualty in the blast.
A roadside bomb exploded near a police vehicle in downtown Kirkuk. The blast wounded two police officers.
Insurgents attempted to assassinate Krim Tabbou, the first secretary of the Socialist Forces Front (FSS).  The attack occurred as Tabbou was driving along National Road 15 en route to visit his home village of Tadmait.  The attack left the car that he was riding in riddled with bullets.
Gunmen fired on neighborhood police in Kan Beni Saad in Diyalah province.  The attack killed three police officers and wounded three others.
A roadside bomb killed three people in the central market of Baiji which is located in Salahuldeen Province.
Three people were killed and four others were wounded in a roadside attack in Mosul.
Unidentified gunmen fired at Ingush Prime Minister Ibragim Malsagov's house in Nazran, Ingushetiya on February 18, 2008. The attack lasted about 20 minutes.
One civilian was injured when an improvised explosive device exploded in the Za'faraniya district of Baghdad. Police were able to defuse another device.
The deputy minister of science and technology was wounded as well as two of his bodyguards when a roadside bomb hit their vehicle in Zayona area of Baghdad.
Seven people were killed and another seventeen wounded when a suicide bomber detonated his explosives in a Al-Asri Bakery in Muqdadiya in Diyala province. Two woman were among those wounded.
One civilian was killed and another was wounded in a car bomb explosion. The incident occurred in an open air market located 20 miles south of Fallujah in Anbar Province.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a sixty-year old man in a drive-by shooting in southern Thailand's restive Narathiwat province.  Islamic insurgents are suspected as drive-by shootings remain a key tactic in their low-level insurgency.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
A suicide bomber killed 2 people and wounded another 3 when he attempted to attack a security checkpoint in Garma near Fallujah. Police reported the incident.
Insurgents detonated three homemade bombs in southern Thailand's restive Narathiwat province.  The attacks all took place in Sungai Padi district.  The first one targeted a motorcycle shop while the next two went off within one kilometer of the first site.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
A roadside bomb targeting civilians at Beirut Square in Baghdad killed one civilian and wounded two others.
On February 23, 2008 a bomb exploded at the base of a TV transmission tower. The bomb caused minimal damage and no causalities. Authorities initially believed the intended target was the transmission tower; however, after further investigation the intended target was the bomb disposal team.  The bomb's trigger was a motion detector that would detonate when the bomb disposal team attempted to diffuse the explosives.ETA first alerted the authorities of the bomb and later claimed responsibility for the attack.
A suicide bomber targeting a group of Shiite shrine visitors heading to one of their holiest festivals killed 40 and wounded 60 others.
Four Shiite visitors were killed and twelve others wounded by a roadside bomb in the Za'faraniya district of Baghdad. The Shiite visitors were on their way to Karbala for a religious festival.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a local defense forces volunteer in southern Thailand's restive Pattani province.  Attacks on local defense forces volunteers are common in southern Thailand.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
A truck carrying bricks from Baqubah to Baghdad hit a roadside bomb that killed the truck driver and his assistant. The accident took place on the highway, 15 miles south of Baqubah.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed General Abdi Kahiye Farah, the head of Mogadishu's police academy.  The killing is viewed as yet another blow to the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) as it tries to stabilize the security situation in the country.  Both Somalia's president and prime minister condemned the killing.Since routing the Union of Islamic Courts (UIC) in December in 2006, both Ethiopia and Somalia's transitional government have been combating a fierce insurgency campaign being waged by Islamic militants affiliated with the UIC.
One boarder police guard was killed and another two wounded when armed men opened fire on their vehicle near Tikrit.
Two civilians were injured by a roadside bomb in Sadiyah, a town east of Baqubah.
One civilian was killed and two others were wounded by a roadside bomb explosion in Habbaniya west of Ramadi.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a father and son inside of their local tea shop in southern Thailand's restive Yala province.  Attacks on large social gathering places, including tea shops, are common in southern Thailand.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
A civilian and his son were killed by a roadside bomb in Mosul.
Early in the morning on Fenruary 29, 2008 a 3kg ammonal bomb exploded outside the headquarters of the Spanish Socialist Party.  The blast caused extensive damage but no casualties.ETA claimed responsibility for the attack.
A roadside bomb killed one person and wounded another three in Mahmudiyah about 20 miles south of Baghdad.
Five people were killed and another four wounded by a roadside bomb in a village near Baqubah.
Unidentified individuals fired rockets at a cell phone mast in Farah province in southwestern Afghanistan. The rocket hit a generator, destroying it, and also disrupted the antenna. In late February, the Taliban threatened to attack cell phone installations if services were not halted at night. The Taliban said that cell phone masts were being used by Afghan and Western soldiers to track Taliban hideouts. This is the fourth attack since the threat was issued.Terrorist incidents in Afghanistan tend to be carried out by the Taliban. After having been ousted from power by a US-led coalition in 2001, the Taliban has waged an insurgency against the Afghan government and US and International Security Assistance Force (NATO) troops in Afghanistan. However, in addition to the Taliban, other groups such as Hezb-e-Islami are also involved in the insurgency.
A suicide car bomber rammed an explosive laden minibus into a checkpoint in Ghadeer in Eastern Baghdad. The checkpoint was outside a building used by the Iraqi Army. The blast killed four and wounded six others.
Unidentified gunmen armed with AK-47s stormed a mosque in the Algerian city of Tizi Ouzou.  The attack left one policeman, who was standing in the doorway of the mosque, dead.  The motive behind the attack is unclear.
Gunmen killed a policeman near his house in western Mosul.
Insurgents detonated a bomb at a school in southern Thailand's restive Narathiwat province.  The attack, which was triggered by a mobile phone, left four soldiers who were guarding the school injured.  Two were critically wounded.  Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
Five people, three policemen and two civilians, were injured by a roadside bomb.  The attackers targeted a police patrol in eastern Mosul.
A suicide car bomber targeted a checkpoint run by a neighborhood security unit in Samarra. The blast killed two people and wounded six others.  Four of the wounded were members of the neighborhood security unit.
On March 5, 2008 FARC rebels blew up a portion of the TransAndian oil pipeline in the Putumayo Department.  The pipeline runs from Orito to Tumaco on the Pacific ocean.
Insurgents detonated a bomb under a bridge, killing one police officer and wounding another in southern Thailand's restive Pattani province.  Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
Gunmen killed four off duty prison guards in Mosul.
Two bombs exploded in Baghdad's commercial district.  The first bomb exploded  in the central district of Karrada.  Soon after, as others gathered to  help the wounded, a suicide bomber detonated his explosives vest amid the crowd.  Most of the casualties occurred during the second attack.  The explosions occurred during a busy time.  Thursday is typically the beginning of the weekend for Muslims.Earlier in the day, coalition troops targeted an Iranian backed Special Groups militia and arrested four people.  Special Groups refers to hard line Shiite militants who have been ignoring the cease fire.
Three policemen and one girl were killed by a suicide car bomb, The bomber's target was a police station in Mosul. The attack also wounded 33 police and four civilians.
A roadside bomb killed three members of the same family and wounded two others near Baqubah.
A roadside bomb exploded, killing two children and an old man. It also wounded a woman. The explosion occurred in the Hazaragan area of the Nad Ali district of Helmand province in southern Afghanistan.Terrorist incidents in Afghanistan tend to be carried out by the Taliban. After having been ousted from power by a US-led coalition in 2001, the Taliban has waged an insurgency against the Afghan government and US and International Security Assistance Force (NATO) troops in Afghanistan. However, in addition to the Taliban, other groups such as Hezb-e-Islami are also involved in the insurgency.
A roadside bomb planted above the top of a rescue car exploded killing one officer and wounding two others in Tikrit.
Unknown gunmen shot and killed the intelligence chief of Dwa Monda district of Khost province while he was traveling to work. The Taliban claimed responsibility.Terrorist incidents in Afghanistan tend to be carried out by the Taliban. After having been ousted from power by a US-led coalition in 2001, the Taliban has waged an insurgency against the Afghan government and US and International Security Assistance Force (NATO) troops in Afghanistan. However, in addition to the Taliban, other groups such as Hezb-e-Islami are also involved in the insurgency.
One person was killed and five others were wounded by a car bomb. The attack occurred in the Shaab district of Baghdad.
Gunmen killed a police officer.  The attack occurred in  Baiji, approximately a hundred miles  north of Baghdad.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
Gunmen killed two policemen.  The attack occurred in Mosul, two hundred and forty miles north of Baghdad.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed an assistant to a village head in southern Thailand's Narathiwat province.  The gunmen shot and killed the village assistant head of Ban Batong in a drive-by shooting.  Islamic insurgents are suspected as drive-by shootings remain a key tactic in their low-level insurgency.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
A joint checkpoint comprised of local neighborhood police (Sahwa) and regular police was attacked by a suicide car bomber in Dhulu'iyah town in Salahuldeen province. Five people were killed. Three members of the checkpoint were among those killed in the attack, while 14 others were wounded. The report was made available by a police lieutenant Colonel called Ibrahim Al-Jubouri. Sahwa forces are known to be a priority target for Al-Qaeda in the area.
A explosives-packed car rammed into the Federal Investigation Agency building in Lahore at the beginning of the workday. The explosion killed 24 people, including 12 employees of the agency. 32 girls hit by flying debris at an elementary school near the building were among the injured. The FIA building housed a department of the federal police's anti-terrorism unit. The explosion tore the faade off the building. Around the same time, two suicide bombers detonated explosives at an advertising agency in another part of the city less than 50 yards from a residence owned by Asif Ali Zardari, the widower of slain opposition leader Benazir Bhutto and co-chairman of her party, the Pakistan People's Party. Zardari was in Islamabad at the time.The bombings occurred about 15 minutes apart.  Twenty-eight people were killed and at least 175 were injured in the two attacks. Pakistani authorities suspect Al-Qaeda and Taliban militants were responsible. Lahore had not been the target of the suicide attacks that struck Pakistan over the past year, however, during the last two months it has suffered three attacks.
Terrorists planted a bomb next to a fuel truck.  As a result, six fuel trucks were set ablaze and three drivers were wounded. The attack occurred in  Mosul, two hundred and forty miles north of Baghdad.  No deaths due to the attack  were reported.
 A roadside bomb targeting the vehicle of a U.S.-backed neighborhood police patrol detonated.  As a result of the attack, three were wounded.  The incident occurred in a town southwest of Kirkuk.
A deputy village chief was killed in a drive-by shooting in Pattani province in southern Thailand. He was riding a motorcycle at the time of the incident. On the same day, militants ambushed the pick-up truck in which another deputy village chief was riding and shot him to death. The attack occurred early on March 11 in neighboring Narathiwat province. These two attacks follow the murder of a deputy village chief in Narathiwat on March 9. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a deputy village chief in a drive-by shooting in southern Thailand's restive Pattani province.  Islamic insurgents are suspected as drive-by shootings remain a key tactic in their low-level insurgency.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
At least 14 civilians were killed and 18 others were injured when an improvised explosives device detonated.  The attack occurred because of  terrorists who were targeting a civilian bus driving  near the al Battha military base on Nasiriyah- Basra Street south of Baghdad. American forces later evacuated some of the injured civilians to a military hospital.
Two farmers were wounded by an improvised explosive device that was planted in their own farm in Abu Saida village near Baqubah. The area has seen activities of several violent groups and therefore it is hard to determine responsibility for the attack.
Three mortar rounds landed in Baghdad's Green Zone.  The Green Zone, also known as the International Zone, is the region containing the U.S. Embassy.  No details about casualties associated with the attack  were reported.
An explosion occurred at the Udalguri railway station in the town of Udalguri in Assam state in northeastern India. No one was injured. The blast occurred at 8:15 pm. Another explosion occurred in the heart of the town 30 minutes later. Another blast occurred in the town of Mazbat (Assam state), leaving 10 people injured.There are about 10 militant organizations operating in Assam.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed Yalee Mana, the former leader of the Pattani United Liberation Organization (PULO).  In addition, both his wife and his son were critically injured in the attack, which took place as Mana was riding his motorcycle.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
A car parked and loaded with explosive materials was detonated in a central area of Baghdad causing the death of nine people and the injury of at least 48 others. All the victims were civilians.The attack took place in Al-Khayam street in Bab-Al-Sharji which is almost the geographical center of the capital and is only across the river from the green zone.The area has been targeted by a number of different militant groups in the past and the perpetrator's identity was unclear by the time the report was issued.
A car loaded with explosives and parked on the highway between Kirkuk and Al-Rashad area exploded killed one passing by civilian and wounded another ten.The responsibility for the attack cannot be determined.
A female suicide bomber killed two people and wounded six others, including an American.  The attack occurred in the town of al-Zab.  Al-Zab is twenty miles southwest of the northern city of Kirkuk.  Many recent suicide bombers in Iraq have been women.
Unknown gunmen shot dead a tribal elder in the Zir Koh area of Shindand district of Herat province in southwestern Afghanistan. The governor of Shindand district said that the elder had been attending a meeting of tribal elders, scholars and a delegation from the Afghan interior ministry. The meeting focused on security and counter-narcotics issues pertaining to the area. The elder came under attack after the meeting ended and he was returning to his area. Two of his friends were wounded in the incident. The Taliban has claimed responsibility for the killing. According to Afghan Islamic Press, over the past few years the Zir Kor area of Shindand district has been regarded as an area of continued internal clashes and violence.  Terrorist incidents in Afghanistan tend to be carried out by the Taliban. After having been ousted from power by a US-led coalition in 2001, the Taliban has waged an insurgency against the Afghan government and US and International Security Assistance Force (NATO) troops in Afghanistan. However, in addition to the Taliban, other groups such as Hezb-e-Islami are also involved in the insurgency.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed an administrator at the Balcad District.  Hassan Ali Gascal was with his security guard in Balcad when he was gunned down.  Attacks on members of government are common in Somalia.Since routing the Union of Islamic Courts (UIC) in December in 2006, both Ethiopia and Somalia's transitional government have been combating a fierce insurgency campaign being waged by Islamic militants affiliated with the UIC.
Katyusha rockets damaged three houses and a school near a U.S. embassy regional office.  The incident occurred in Hilla, sixty miles south of Baghdad.  As a result of the attack, eight Iraqi civilians were wounded and one woman is dead.   A total of 29 rockets were fired.
Gunmen attacked a police patrol.  The incident occurred in Kut.  As a result of the attack, one policeman died and eight others were injured.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a policeman in Baydhabo's Suuqa Xoolaha neighborhood.  Attacks on police forces are common in Somalia.Since routing the Union of Islamic Courts (UIC) in December in 2006, both Ethiopia and Somalia's transitional government have been combating a fierce insurgency campaign being waged by Islamic militants affiliated with the UIC.
Armed militants wearing army uniforms attacked a civilian house in Iskandariyah. The owner of the house was killed and the his brother and son were kidnapped.It is known that Shiite militias have infiltrated some of the security forces in the south of Iraq, and have access to gear and equipment that enables them to pose as security forces. It is likely that this attack is committed by these militias posing as security forces.
A car bomb in Mosul wounded three civilians.  Mosul is two hundred and forty miles north of Baghdad and in the Nineveh province.  No deaths were reported as a result of the attack.
Gunmen attacked police in Kut.  As a result of the attack, three policemen were injured.   Attacks on police are common in Iraq.  Kut has had an elevated number of attacks on police lately.
Members of the New People's Army (NPA) burst into the home of a village official in southeast Manila and killed him along with his daughter.  No further details were given on this attack by the communist guerilla force.
Armed men attacked a border police checkpoint in the Tabe area of Nangarhar province in northeastern Afghanistan. Once policeman was wounded in the attack. One of the attackers was killed and another was wounded. The attack occurred at night on March 15. Attacks against police officers and police installations are common in Afghanistan. Terrorist attacks in Afghanistan tend to be carried out by the Taliban. After having been ousted from power by a US-led coalition in 2001, the Taliban has waged an insurgency against the Afghan government and US and International Security Assistance Force (NATO) troops in Afghanistan. However, in addition to the Taliban, other groups such as Hezb-e-Islami are also involved in the insurgency.
The headquarters of the KDP (Kurdish Democratic Party) in prophet Younis district, was attacked by a suicide bomber wearing an explosive belt. Twelve people were wounded in the attack which took place in the morning of the first working day of the week. Al-Qaeda actively operates within Mosul and its outskirts and therefore it most likely that it is responsible for the attack. KDP headquarters is not a government office but the president of Kurdish region (which doesn't include Mosul) is the leader of the party.
A parked car bomb killed two people.  The attack occurred in downtown Hawija.  Hawija is forty five miles south of Baghdad.
A grenade attack on people celebrating Ali-Aie-Lrigang, a local festival, killed at least four people and injured 53 others. The celebration was being held in an open field in Dhemaji district in Assam state in northeastern India. Four members of the Assam police battalion, who were guarding the area,  were seriously injured in the attack. The United Liberation Front Asom [ULFA] is suspected to be responsible for the attack. There are about 10 militant organizations operating in Assam.The ULFA, an organization with the declared goal of achieving independence for Assam, was established in 1979.
Unidentified militants blew up a building of Pirwal Akhorwal Government Girls High School in Darra Adamkehl on the night of March 16. Local residents said that the explosion completely destroyed the nine-room building. They said the school administration had received letters warning them to close the school. Handbills purportedly distributed by local militants two days before the attack warned women to stop going to schools and join seminaries instead. Local residents also said that the army is  taking position on the hilltops and paramilitary troops are patrolling the Indus Highway only during the daytime leaving them vulnerable to attacks by militants at night.
A bomb targeting a police checkpoint detonated underneath a bridge in Kadiria, Algeria.  The attack did not injure any policemen.  Instead, the blast killed a schoolgirl and left two other children wounded.  There was no immediate word on who was behind the attack.
One civilian was wounded when an improvised explosive device went off in the western Baghdad neighborhood of Mansour.This is the second roadside bomb to be planted and detonated in the neighborhood in one day.Al-Qaeda is the only fringe element that still targets government security forces and civilians in the area. Former insurgents were mostly working in the Sahwa neighborhood police at the time.
As election date approaches, there was an explosion in Paskha near a fuel station, injuring one person. It was unclear who was behind the attack.
(First of six attacks) Unidentified militants detonated explosives at a Khasadar checkpoint in Moharer in Pakistan's Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA). Four other checkpoints in Atta Bazar, Mamad Kor, Ashrafabad and Bahae Dag were also bombed on the same day.March 17 also saw the bombing of a women's vocational center in the FATA.   The Khasadar are an official tribal militia in the FATA who receive their authority from the Frontier Crimes Regulation.The FATA borders southeastern Afghanistan and has been considered a safe-haven for the Taliban and other foreign militants, including al-Qaeda sympathizers, since 2001.
Two local government officials were killed in a drive-by shooting as they were on their way to work in Yala province. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
A roadside bomb targeted a police patrol in Baghdad.  As a result of the ensuing explosion, one policeman was killed and one was injured.  The incident occurred in the Mansour neighborhood at Ameerat street.  The location is close to a teachers training institute.
(Sixth of six attacks) Unidentified militants detonated explosives at a women's vocational center in Wazir Kili in Mohmand agency in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA). Five Khadasar  checkpoints in Moharer, Atta Bazar, Mahmad Kor, Ashrafabad and Bahae Dag were also bombed on the same day. The Khasadar are an official tribal militia in the FATA who receive their authority from the Frontier Crimes Regulation.The FATA borders southeastern Afghanistan and has been considered a safe-haven for the Taliban and other foreign militants, including al-Qaeda sympathizers, since 2001.
Gunmen armed with machine guns attempted to assassinate the Al-Sistani deputy in Basra. The target, Sheikh Abdul Atheem Al-Edani was injured in the attack and his driver was killed.The Mahdi army had repeatedly attacked Sistani's representatives in Basra and it is likely that the same group is also responsible for the attack as well.
On March 18, 2008 a bomb exploded outside of a Banco de Credito e Inversiones branch in Santiago. The blast caused extensive damage to the branch but no casualties. The Jean-Marc Rouillan Armed and Heartless Columns claimed responsibility for the attack. The group is a domestic anarchist group that claimed the attack was in support of Mapuche Indian's cause.
Gunmen seriously wounded an aide of Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani.  Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani is  Iraq's top Shi'ite cleric.  The incident occurred in  Basra, three hundred and forty miles southeast of Baghdad.
A bomb exploded near a playground in Bannang Sata district of Yala province in southern Thailand. Eight children were injured, three seriously. The bomb was hid inside a motorcycle which was left near the playground behind a house. Some of the injured children were in the house and the others were playing in the playground. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
A parked car bomb targeting civilians exploded.  As a result, three policemen died, three policemen were injured,  and thirty-nine civilians  were injured.  The incident occurred in Mosul.
A police colonel was killed and another unidentified person was wounded in the explosion of a vehicle born improvised explosive device in Karadah district in Baghdad. The nature of the area makes a target for more than one armed group and therefore it is hard to predict who's responsible for the attack.
A car bomb killed an Iraqi police colonel and wounded a civilian.  The attack occurred in Baghdad's Karrada district.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
Police officer Yaseen Majeed was killed by gunmen.  The gunmen used machine guns.  Officer Majeed was killed in the Manawi Pasha area of central Basra.   Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
A massive bomb attack on a highway overpass, or flyover, in Kashmir's main city Srinagar killed one person and injured 23 others. Two groups claimed responsibility for the attack: Al Madina Regiment, which is seen as a front for the Pakistan-based hard line rebel group Lashkar-e-Toiba and the pro-Pakistan Hizbul Mujahedin, Kashmir's main rebel group. Hizbul Mujahedin's spokesman said that the attack was aimed at Central Reserved Police Force (CRPF) personnel and regretted injuries to civilians. Police and the CRPF said that an improvised explosive device was planted in a CRPF bunker located on the overpass just in front of the highly guarded state high court complex and near the civil secretariat. The explosion occurred around 5:45 pm. A security official said that he thought the blast occurred prematurely because there were no CRPF personnel present when the bomb exploded and there was no VIP movement  on the overpass. The official said that the militants may have intended for the bomb to explode on the morning of the following day when CRPF personnel were taking position for security duty.      Islamic militants have been fighting India's rule over part of Kashmir since 1989. Indian-controlled territory comprises Kashmir Valley, which is 95 per cent Muslim, Jammu, which is two-thirds Hindu and one-third Muslim, and Ladakh, which is Buddhist and Muslim. The conflict has left more than 40,000 people dead by official count.
Gunmen attacked a police patrol in Mosul.  As a result of the attack, two policemen died.  Mosul is two hundred and forty miles north of Baghdad.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
A parked car bomb was detonated and injured two policemen.  The incident occurred in the al-Sukkar neighborhood near al-Khansaa hospital.   Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
A nine year old little boy was wounded when a roadside bomb exploded near Tirkit in an early morning hour.The explosion didn't seem to target anyone but civilians and it took place at the Alam highway intersection that leads to Baghdad.The only militant group that targets civilians in the area is Al-Qaeda, and by assuming civilians were the target, the group then must be responsible for the attack.
A bomb exploded, wounding four people. The small bomb was hidden in a trash bin near the main shrine in Mazar-e Sharif, the Shrine of Hazrat-e Ali. The attack occurred as the northern city was filled with people for Afghanistan's New Year celebrations. Mazar-e Sharif is the focal point of the celebrations. Shopkeepers were among the injured. A few shops and a car were damaged by the explosion. The police chief of Mazar-e Sharif blamed the attack on the enemies of Afghanistan, a term mostly used by Afghan officials to refer to Taliban insurgents or other Islamic extremist groups. Terrorist attacks in Afghanistan tend to be carried out by the Taliban. After having been ousted from power by a US-led coalition in 2001, the Taliban has waged an insurgency against the Afghan government and NATOs International Security Assistance Force, which includes US soldiers. However, in addition to the Taliban, other groups such as Hezb-e-Islami are also involved in the insurgency.
The Chief of Police of the al-Mahata area in Balad was ambushed by gunmen.  The Chief and two members of his security detail were killed.  Also, two civilians were wounded.   Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
An explosive device planted under a bridge went off in Khuzdar in Balochistan province, injuring four people. Two policemen were among the injured. (Note: the source did not specify as to whether the attack occurred in Khuzdar district or the town of Khuzdar)The Pakistani government has been fighting militants in Balochistan who demand political and economic autonomy.
An improvised explosive device targeting a police patrol in central Kirkuk killed a civilian and wounded five policemen.Jaish Al-Tariqa Al-Naqshabandiya or Al-Naqshabandi Method army is one of the important Islamic insurgent groups in the area. It is possible that it could be responsible for the attack.
An improvised explosives device (IED) exploded in the Mansour neighborhood in west Baghdad.  As a result of the attack, six were wounded.
A relatively large number of militants attacked a liquid petroleum gas manufacturing plant in Zafaraniya are of Baghdad. LPG is the main cooking fuel used in Iraq and its continuous supply is economically vital.seven civilians were killed in the attack and another 16 were wounded. The attackers used three civilian vehicles as shooting platforms, which is an indication of their large numbers. Large number of attackers is a characteristic of Al-Mahdi Army which operates in this region of the capital.
A police Brigadier General Akram Awad Radhi was killed when gunmen ambushed his vehicle in Baqubah. The Brigadier's driver was also killed in the attack.Baqubah is a mixed city where several militant outlaw groups operate and carry out violence and terrorism tactics. It is therefore difficult to determine responsibility for the attack.
Taliban militants attacked the convoy of the governor of Ghazni province, Sher Khosty, when he was returning to his office from a trip to Galian district. Neither the governor nor his bodyguards were injured in the attack. The attack occurred in the Pul-e Mati area of Moqor district. The Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack. Terrorist attacks in Afghanistan tend to be carried out by the Taliban. After being ousted from power by a US-led coalition in 2001, the Taliban has waged an insurgency against the Afghan government and NATOs International Security Assistance Force (includes US troops). However, in addition to the Taliban, other groups such as Hezb-e-Islami are also involved in the insurgency.
A suicide car bomber attacked a checkpoint, killing one and wounding eight others.  The attack occurred in Mosul, a city two hundred and forty miles north of Baghdad.
Militants blew up dozens of oil tankers in the town of Landi Kotal. The tankers, which were being used to supply NATO forces in Afghanistan, were parked when the explosion of an improvised explosive device placed underneath one of the trucks took place. The explosion triggered a massive fire which injured 65 people and completely gutted 36 tankers. More than 80 tankers were parked in the town. Landi Kotal is located near Pakistan's border with Afghanistan in the Federally Administrated Tribal Areas (FATA), in the northwestern part of the country. The FATA has been considered a safe-haven for the Taliban and other foreign militants, including al-Qaeda sympathizers, since 2001.
A roadside bomb planted in the way of a walking police patrol wounded three members of the patrol in Zayouna area, east Baghdad.The area is a mixed one but extremely close to the Mahdi Army strongholds in the eastern parts of the city. It is likely that Mahdi Army is responsible for the attack.
(Second of two attacks)In Ajrestan district in Ghazni province a Taliban rocket exploded in a mosque, killing three Taliban and a civilian. Also, in Ajrestan district, a Taliban rocket exploded in a mosque killing two policemen and injuring three others. Terrorist attacks in Afghanistan tend to be carried out by the Taliban. After being ousted from power by a US-led coalition in 2001, the Taliban has waged an insurgency against the Afghan government and NATOs International Security Assistance Force (includes US troops). However, in addition to the Taliban, other groups such as Hezb-e-Islami are also involved in the insurgency.
Unidentified gunmen ambushed a convoy of mine-clearing vehicles in Jawzjan province in northern Afghanistan, killing five and wounding seven.The victims worked for Afghan Technical Consultants (ATC), a mine-clearing organization. According to the ATC director, three people stopped one of the vehicles and started shooting at the passengers. Terrorist attacks in Afghanistan tend to be carried out by the Taliban. After being ousted from power by a US-led coalition in 2001, the Taliban has waged an insurgency against the Afghan government and NATOs International Security Assistance Force (includes US troops). However, in addition to the Taliban, other groups such as Hezb-e-Islami are also involved in the insurgency.
Guerrillas with the New People's Army torched a number of pieces of heavy equipment that were being used for construction in the village of Banana La Union.  According to the police, the insurgents burned a Dynapac road roller among other pieces of equipment.
A number of gunmen attacked the house of the governor of Babil Province in the city of Hillah. Three solders tasked with providing security for the house were wounded in the attack. The Mahdi Army is stepping up its attacks against various government targets during this time, and Hillah is a majority Shiite city which makes the group the main militant operator there.The Mahdi Army is also stepping up it activity in Baghdad as well being locked in combat against Iraqi troops in Basra during the same period.
Gunmen kidnapped three policemen.  The officers were guarding a police center.  The attack occurred in Basra, an area with a great deal of recent violence.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
Members of the Shiite Militia the Mahdi Army were responsible for randomly attacking civilians in Al-Sa'doon street in central Baghdad.The attack took place during the morning rush hour in one of the most crowded streets of the capital.The Mahdi Army is locked in a conflict with U.S. and Iraqi security forces in several locations in capital and in south of Iraq. This attack is one of a few where the militias attacked civilians in urban centers for no obvious reason other spreading terror.Six civilians were injured in the attack.
Members of the Shiite Militia the Mahdi Army were responsible for randomly attacking civilians in Al-Kifah district in central Baghdad.The attack took place in a busy market place of the capital and during the early morning whole sale period of the market day.The Mahdi Army is locked in a conflict with U.S. and Iraqi security forces in several locations in capital and in south of Iraq. This attack is one of a few where the militias attacked civilians in Urban centers for not obvious reason other spreading terror.Five civilians were injured in the attack.
One policeman was killed and two others were captured by Taliban militants after a gun battle in the southern province of Ghazni. Terrorist attacks in Afghanistan tend to be carried out by the Taliban. After being ousted from power by a US-led coalition in 2001, the Taliban has waged an insurgency against the Afghan government and NATOs International Security Assistance Force (includes US troops). However, in addition to the Taliban, other groups such as Hezb-e-Islami are also involved in the insurgency.
Al-Mahdi Army targeted a civilian neighborhood in east of Baghdad with Mortar shells during escalating clashes with government and U.S. forces. The particular target of this attack was totally civilian in nature and while most of the militia mortar attacks are aimed at government or U.S. targets this one has not. One civilian was killed in the attack and two others were wounded. It is important to note that Shiite political rivals of Al-Mahdi Army like ISCI have considerable support in this neighborhood.
The office of the mayor of Khan Bani Saad, a town in Diyala, was shelled by mortars fired by the Mahdi Army.There were no recorded casualties. Security forces imposed a curfew in an attempt to find the group responsible for the attack. It was unclear whether or not, the group was found or detained.
Gunmen kidnapped Tahseen al-Sheikhli while he was in his home.  Mr. al-Sheikhli was a civilian spokesman for the Baghdad security plan.  The Baghdad security plan is designed to make the capital safer.
Unidentified assailants shot dead two officers from Pakistan's Intelligence Bureau's Anti-Terrorism Section. A senior intelligence official said that the two officers, Inspector Mohammad Ibrahim and his junior Fazlur Rehman, were at the forefront of efforts to combat al-Qaeda in Karachi. The official said that they had received death threats from the Taliban and al-Qaeda during the past several months. Witnesses said that the attackers, who were riding motorcycles, intercepted the victims, who were also on motorcycles, in front of a car showroom and shot them at point-blank range. The attack occurred around 7:20 pm.
Mahdi Army militants assassinated the mayor of Ghmash district in Diwaniya. The attack started a major confrontation between the Iraqi security forces and the Mahdi Army Militia in the district and then in all of the city.Clashes that broke out after the assassination included civilian Sadr followers in addition to the Militia gunmen.
Terrorists fired bombs into the Green Zone.  Specifically, they aimed to damage the Office of Vice President Tareq al-Hashemi.  As a result of the attack, one security officer died.  The Vice President was not in his office at the time of the attack.  The Green Zone, also known as the International Zone, is the site of the U.S. Embassy in Iraq and other diplomatic institutions.  Attacks on the Green Zone are fairly common.
Unidentified gunmen shot and a killed a local government official in southern Thailand's restive Pattani province.  Attacks on government officials are common in southern Thailand.  Islamic insurgents are suspected as drive-by shootings remain a key tactic in their low-level insurgency.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
Taliban militants attacked a police convoy in the Bala Morghab district of Badghis province in northwestern Afghanistan. The ensuing clash lasted for two hours. Six militants were killed and two were injured. One policeman was injured. Terrorist attacks in Afghanistan tend to be carried out by the Taliban. After being ousted from power by a US-led coalition in 2001, the Taliban has waged an insurgency against the Afghan government and NATOs International Security Assistance Force (includes US troops). However, in addition to the Taliban, other groups such as Hezb-e-Islami are also involved in the insurgency.
Two people were killed and two were injured when an attacker on a motorcycle threw two bombs into a mosque in the town of Biratnagar, southeast of Kathmandu. Police immediately imposed a curfew after the attack. A group known as the Nepal Defense Army claimed responsibility for the attack.
An unidentified gunman shot and killed the deputy chairman of the Monaragala town Pradesheeya Sabha,or local government authority, A.N. Muthulingam. Mr. Muthulingam was a doctor by profession and the assailant is said to have shot him at his place of work in Monaragala town. The victim was an active supporter of the ruling United Peoples' Freedom Alliance party and its campaign against terrorism. Monaragala town is located in Uva province in southern Sri Lanka. Sri Lanka has been locked in a civil war between the government and the LTTE, also known as the Tamil Tigers, since 1983. The LTTE seeks self-rule in areas of Sri Lanka home to the Tamil ethnic group. Over the course of the conflict, the LTTE has used conventional, guerrilla, and terror tactics, including around 200 suicide bombings.
A Muslim man was shot dead as he returned home from the local mosque in Yala province in southern Thailand. The killing was one of two attacks on Muslims in Yala on March 29. In the other attack unidentified gunmen killed the son of a local politician. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and, as of March 2008, more than 3000 people have perished from the violence.
On March 30, 2008 two small bombs exploded at a booster station on Izarraitz Hill in Basque Country between the towns of Azpeitia and Azkoitia.  The blast caused no damage or injuries.ETA warned the authorities of the attack prior to the blast.
Police Colonel Ziyad Qasim and another officer died after being shot by gunmen.  The attack occurred  in western Mosul.  Mosul is 240 miles north of Baghdad.  Attacks on police are common in Iraq.
Unidentified shot and killed a twenty-eight year old man in a drive-by shooting in southern Thailand's restive Narathiwat province.  Islamic insurgents are suspected as drive-by shootings remain a key tactic in their low-level insurgency.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
A roadside bomb targeting the convoy of Ibrahim Hassan exploded.  Mr. Hassan is the head of the Diyala governorate council.  The convoy was on its way at Saadiya when the incident took place, ninety kilometers east of Baghdad.   As a result of the attack, two guards were killed.
Terrorists fired six mortar bombs into the Green Zone.  The Green Zone, also known as the International Zone, is the site of the U.S. Embassy in Iraq.  Attacks on the Green Zone are fairly common.  No casualties were reported with the attack.
(2nd of 2 attacks)Insurgents critically injured a twenty-year old man in an attack by unknown perpetrators in southern Thailand's restive Pattani province.  Shortly following this attack, a bomb detonated as authorities arrived to inspect the scene of the attack.  It is important to note that no further details were given on the first attack.  The second attack left two policemen, five soldiers, and four civilians injured.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
A bomb exploded in the Kokarai area of Swat valley, destroying a police residential quarters and partially damaging a check post, while another bomb planted near the check post was defused. Swat valley is located in Pakistan's North-West Frontier Province.
Five members of Sahwa forces patrol were killed by accident after misleadingly thinking that they have defused a nearby roadside bomb. Three other members of the patrol were wounded in the incident.The same incident was initially thought to be a suicide attack but accounts from the wounded explained the circumstances of the accident.
Taliban militants attacked anti-narcotics policemen in southern Helmand province in southern Afghanistan, killing three. The attack occurred in the provincial capital, Lashkar Gah. Afghanistan is the world's top producer of illegal opium, which is used to make heroin, accounting for more than 90% of the global supply. Although the Taliban is responsible for most of the terrorist attacks in Afghanistan, drug cartels with their own armies have been fighting efforts to curb the production and export of opium.
Taliban militants attacked a police patrol in Ghazni province near the Shabaz Shops area on the Kabul-Kandahar highway, killing one policeman and injuring another. Two militants were killed in the ensuing clash. Ghazni province is located in eastern Afghanistan. Terrorist attacks in Afghanistan tend to be carried out by the Taliban and attacks against the police are common. After being ousted from power by a US-led coalition in 2001, the Taliban has waged an insurgency against the Afghan government and NATOs International Security Assistance Force (includes US troops). However, in addition to the Taliban, other groups such as Hezb-e-Islami are also involved in the insurgency.
Insurgents rocked a police patrol with a roadside bomb blast along Pattani-Narathiwat road in southern Thailand's restive Pattani province.  The attack left three officers wounded.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
The bullet-riddled bodies of two young Muslim men were found along a rural road in Narathiwat province in southern Thailand. Police believe the men were between 19 and 22 years old. Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and, as of March 2008, more than 3000 people have perished from the violence.
Three policemen were wounded when an improvised explosive device targeted their patrol in Al-Qahira district in Baghdad. Al--Qahira is a majority Shiite area of the capital and Al-Mahdi army can operate there with apt support from the local population. It is also adjacent to Al-Sadr district which makes it ideal for hit and run attacks.
An off-duty policeman died after gunmen opened fire on his care.  The attack occurred in Kirkuk, approximately one hundred and fifty-five miles north of Baghdad.  Attacks on police are common throughout Iraq.
A roadside bomb exploded.  The bomb targeted cleaning workers. As a result, three individuals were injured.  The incident occurred in the  Al Mashtal region of Baghdad.
At dawn, three improvised explosives devices ( IEDs) exploded.  The bombs  targeted three houses at Sadiyah village of Khanaqeen located east of Baquba .  As a result of the attack, one woman was killed and a man was injured. Subsequently, police arrested 17 suspects.
Insurgents kidnapped two aid workers who were promptly taken to the Middle Jubba Region.  Those kidnapped were employees of Genesys, a firm doing survey work for the Food and Agriculture Organization.  One of the victims was a Kenyan and one was British.  Attacks on aid organizations are common in Somalia.
Four policemen and four civilians were wounded when an improvised explosive device exploded. The attack took place in New Mosul district.Al-Qaeda is known to operate in the area and it is also known to target government security forces regardless of civilian collateral damage.
A car bomb exploded in the Harthiya district.  The district is located in western Baghdad.   As a result of the attack, three people died and ten were wounded.
A parked car bomb exploded in central Baghdad, killing three civilians and wounding ten.  The attack occurred at the  Amina al-Sheikhly Pharmacy in the Harthiyah neighborhood of central Baghdad.  One of the victims was a woman.
An improvised explosive device targeted a police patrol in the western side of Mosul. One policeman was killed in the attack and another wounded. The incident was reported by the local police of the city.Al-Qaeda is the main active group in Mosul and its outskirts that targets government security forces. Therefore it is likely that Al-Qaeda is responsible for the attack.
Terrorists launched three mortar rounds into the Green Zone.  The Green Zone, also known as the International Zone, is the site of the U.S. Embassy in Iraq.  No information was released regarding casualties associated with this attack.
Unidentified attackers detonated remote-controlled explosives planted near four CD and video shops in Peshawar, the capital of Pakistan's North-West Frontier Province. The shops were badly damaged.
An adhesive explosive device was attached to a civilian vehicle in Al-Qahira district went off wounding two of the vehicle occupants. These adhesive devices are relatively small and are attached to vehicles for the purpose of assassinations. The responsibility for the attack cannot be determined due to the fact that such devices are used by a different number of militant groups.
Insurgents with al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb detonated a roadside bomb that targeted a food supply truck.  They attack destroyed the truck, which was delivering food to the army, and killed its driver.  The group later claimed credit for the attack on its website.
An improvised explosive device targeted the house of one of the members of the Sahwa police in Samarra. There were no casualties in the incident but the house suffered some damage.Al-Qaeda is known to target Sahwa forces in Sunni cities like Samarra, and is likely responsible for this attack as well.
Taliban militants killed two policemen in an attack on their patrol in Ghazni province in eastern Afghanistan. The attack occurred in the Chorkhel area of Moqor district. The Taliban also killed a policeman working in the Criminal Investigation Office of the security command in the town of Moqor in the same district. Terrorist attacks in Afghanistan tend to be carried out by the Taliban and attacks against the police are common. After being ousted from power by a US-led coalition in 2001, the Taliban has waged an insurgency against the Afghan government and NATOs International Security Assistance Force (includes US troops). However, in addition to the Taliban, other groups such as Hezb-e-Islami are also involved in the insurgency.
A 15-year-old Muslim boy was shot dead in the town of Chao Ai Rong in Narathiwat Province in southern Thailand as he drove his motorbike home from work. The attacker was riding pillion on another motorbike, which approached the victim from behind. Wae-hama Tuankama was believed to have been singled out as an informant for the police in Joh I Rong and Sungai Padi districts.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and, as of March 2008, more than 3000 people have perished from the violence.
Five policemen and five civilians were wounded by two roadside bombs that targeted a police patrol in Zayouna in eastern Baghdad.Al-Mahdi Army's strong hold in Sadr city is not too far from the area of the attack which is an upscale neighborhood that houses many active and former army officers. The Mahdi army is also the only major militant group that has easy access to the area.
Two power relay lines were blown up in Narathiwat Province by individuals suspected of being involved with the insurgency in southern Thailand. The attack occurred in the afternoon. It was the one of three attacks on utilities installations in Narathiwat Province on April 7. Two other power relay lines were blown up in the morning and a mobile-phone transmitter pole was blown up at an unspecified time. Police said that the five bombs were similar in size and composition. They believe the same individuals carried out the attacks. The attacks occurred in Joh I Rong District, an area which traditionally has been highly contested between insurgents and security forces. The attacks crippled electricity and mobile phone service in the area. Authorities heading to investigate the three attacks encountered nails and logs on the road, which were also suspected to have been placed by insurgents.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and, as of March 2008, more than 3000 people have perished from the violence.
An unidentified group torched a micro-bus that was parked in the town of Inaruwa, the district headquarters of Sunsari District, on the morning of April 7. It was the first of two attacks in Inaruwa on that day. A socket bomb exploded at a hardware store in the afternoon. Two individuals, Buddhi Chandra Jain and Surendra Mehata, were injured. The explosion targeted a Nepali Congress motorcycle rally. The Nepali Congress is one of Nepal's main political parties. Two organizations, Janatantrik Terai Mekti Morcha and the Madhesi Mukti Tigers claimed responsibility for the attack.Elections for a constitutional assembly which is to write a new constitution for Nepal were held on April 11. The assembly is expected to abolish the country's 240-year-old monarchy.
A bomb exploded just after a police van passed the site where the bomb was planted in Balochistan province. The blast caused minor damage to the vehicle and the policemen inside sustained minor injuries. The attack occurred at noon in Sakran area near Hub industrial state. The Pakistani government has been fighting militants in Balochistan who demand political and economic autonomy.
A mortar shell fell on a house in Dhulu'iyah in Salahuldeen province killing one women and wounding another three members of her family. The responsibility for the attack cannot be determined.
Taliban militants attacked a police patrol in Helmand province in southern Afghanistan, leading to an hour-long gun battle. One policeman and four of the attackers were killed. Two policemen were injured. Terrorist attacks in Afghanistan tend to be carried out by the Taliban and attacks against the police are common. After being ousted from power by a US-led coalition in 2001, the Taliban has waged an insurgency against the Afghan government and NATOs International Security Assistance Force (includes US troops). However, in addition to the Taliban, other groups such as Hezb-e-Islami are also involved in the insurgency.
A suicide car bomber rocked the base of the Burundian peacekeepers who were in Mogadishu under the auspices of the African Union (AU) peacekeepers.  The attack left one Burundian soldier dead along with suicide bomber himself.  In addition, seven other civilians were wounded in the attack.  The attack was later claimed by the Mujahideen Youth Movement.  This was not the first attack on AU forces in Somalia.Since routing the Union of Islamic Courts (UIC) in December in 2006, both Ethiopia and Somalia's transitional government have been combating a fierce insurgency campaign being waged by Islamic militants affiliated with the UIC.
Two vehicles loaded with explosives were detonated successively in Mosul killing four people, three of whom are policemen. Another twenty including three policemen were also wounded in the attack.Al-Qaeda is the most likely anti government terrorist group capable of delivering such attacks in Mosul and its outskirts. The attack took place in central Mosul and the casualty count was provided by the local police.
Early in the morning on April 10, 2008 a total of 35 vehicles were torched in Athens and along with four car dealerships and a Greek-Italian school.  The arsonist specfically targeted Italian cars and interest in Athens during the rampage.Conspiracy of Fire Cells of Thessaloniki-Athens claimed responsibility for the attack. They targeted Italian interest to show solidarity with anarchists jailed in Italy.
The first of two suicide bombers drove his car into a police checkpoint and detonated his explosives killing three policemen and one civilian. Al-Qaeda is known to have activity in Mosul and the tactic is typical of its indoctrination.
Militants detonated an explosive device at a Khasadar check post in the Zargun Khel area of the town of Darra Adamkhel in Pakistan's North-West Frontier Province. The attack occurred on the night of April 10. The Khasadar are an official tribal militia in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) and North West Frontier Province who receive their authority from the Frontier Crimes Regulation.
A suicide attacker drove a vehicle loaded with explosives into a police checkpoint in Ramadi, the capital of Anbar province. The tactic and the nature of the area as well as of the target leaves no doubt that Al-Qaeda was responsible for the attack.Three policemen were killed in the attack and another five were wounded.
Unidentified gunmen shot dead an intelligence official in Pakistan's North-West Frontier Province. Three men shot Khaliq-us Zaman, an inspector for the Intelligence Bureau, after he had finished Friday prayers at a mosque in the Kausar Abad neighborhood of Charsadda district. Zaman was assigned to follow the activities of pro-Taliban militants in the adjoining Mohmand tribal district and had received threats. Another intelligence bureau official was shot dead in January 2008 in Seerikh village. In the same region, former interior minister Aftab Sherpao, who led a crackdown on militants, has survived two suicide blasts.
A double suicide attack targeted a convoy of Indian road workers in Nimroz Province in southwestern Afghanistan, killing two Indian engineers and one civilian. Four Indian workers, one Afghan policeman and one Afghan civilian were injured. The Indians worked for the Border Roads Organization, an Indian road building company. At 8 am they were driving to work on the Delaram-Zarang highway in the Menar area of the province when they were attacked. The Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack, however, the group's spokesman gave a different account of how the attack was carried out.  After the blasts authorities captured a third suspected attacker with an explosive-filled jacket.Terrorist attacks in Afghanistan tend to be carried out by the Taliban. After being ousted from power by a US-led coalition in 2001, the Taliban has waged an insurgency against the Afghan government and NATOs International Security Assistance Force (includes US troops). However, in addition to the Taliban, other groups such as Hezb-e-Islami are also involved in the insurgency.
A police patrol was attacked by an improvised explosive device in Baghdad in the central area of Karadah. Two police officer were injured. The attack took place near the national theater intersection which was repeatedly attacked by various methods within the period of two weeks of this incident. The intersection represents an important path that links main roads between two strongholds of Al-Mahdi Army. The first is in the east (Sadr City) and the other is in the south of Baghdad (Al-Amil and Al-Risala). Police Patrols protecting this intersection were repeatedly attacked to clear the way. It is also worth mentioning that the National Theater is only a few hundred feet away from the Air Force club which was under a similar amount of attacks during this period.Two policemen were wounded in the attack.
An improvised explosive device was detonated on a passing bus that was used by members of the local awakening forces (Sahwa). Two members of the unite were severely wounded in the attack.The primary enemy to the Sahwa forces is Al-Qaeda among other groups. This particular attack took place in a mostly Sunni Arab area of the city which makes it possible for Al-Qaeda to deliver an attack and then blend with the population.
Unidentified men shot and killed five people, including two tribal leaders, in Helmand province in southern Afghanistan. The tribal leaders, Abdol Rahman Jan and Zaher Jan, were residents of Charchino district of Uruzgan and they had come to Helmand to resolve a dispute. They were returning to Lashkar Gah from Marjah district when they were killed. Terrorist attacks in Afghanistan tend to be carried out by the Taliban. After being ousted from power by a US-led coalition in 2001, the Taliban has waged an insurgency against the Afghan government and NATOs International Security Assistance Force (includes US troops). However, in addition to the Taliban, other groups such as Hezb-e-Islami are also involved in the insurgency.
A suicide attacker blue his explosives in the middle of a Funeral in Tel Afar town near Mosul. The U.S. military said three people were killed in the attack and another thirty five were wounded. The town's mayor gave a slightly different casualty count.Al-Qaeda is the most likely group to be responsible for the attack due to the tactic used in addition to the nature of the target.
An improvised explosive device was planted inside a university students' bus killed two and wounded another six. The bus was transporting students near the University of Technology near Karadah.The perpetrator is still unknown and the only reason to set such a target is wreak havoc within the educational institutions of the city.
An unknown group of insurgents attacked a police post in the Mogadishu neighborhood of Dharkeynley District.  There were no reports of any casualties in the attack.  The Mujahideen Youth Movement later claimed credit for the attack.Since routing the Union of Islamic Courts (UIC) in December in 2006, both Ethiopia and Somalia's transitional government have been combating a fierce insurgency campaign being waged by Islamic militants affiliated with the UIC.
A parked car bomb targeting the convoy of a local police affairs director, Major Ali Sabri, killed one civilian and wounded another eight. Five policemen were among those wounded in the explosion. The attack took place near Mousa bin Nusair Gas Station in Karradah district in central Baghdad.The responsibility for the attack cannot be predicted as both Al-Qaeda and Al-Mahdi army use parked car bombs in their attacks.
A massive bomb loaded into a vehicle parked in front of the Diyala governorate building killed 36 people and wounded another 67. Three buses and several other vehicles were also destroyed in the blast which also damaged a few commercial shops in the area. The local authorities gave slightly different casualty counts than those provided by the U.S. military. The local authorities estimated that 38 were killed and another 80 wounded which is slightly higher than the U.S. military figures above.Al-Qaeda is one of the few organizations that are capable of such targeting and damage delivery. The group also operates in Baqubah and it is likely responsible for this attack as well.
A remote-detonated bomb exploded near the border town of Spin Boldak in Kandahar province in southern Afghanistan, blowing up a police vehicle which was passing by and killing two policemen on board. Three policemen were wounded in the attack. Though, the bomb was similar to those used by the Taliban, the police did not speculate about the identity of those responsible.  Terrorist attacks in Afghanistan tend to be carried out by the Taliban and attacks against the police are common. After being ousted from power by a US-led coalition in 2001, the Taliban has waged an insurgency against the Afghan government and NATOs International Security Assistance Force (includes US troops). However, in addition to the Taliban, other groups such as Hezb-e-Islami are also involved in the insurgency.
A civilian was killed and a number of commercial shops were damaged when a car loaded with explosives targeted a police patrol in Mosul.Al-Qaeda is the main militant group that attacks government security forces in the city and its surroundings. It is likely that Al-Qaeda is responsible for this attack as well.
The Taliban claim to have beheaded two men whom they say were spying for US forces in Karangal district of Konar province in northern Afghanistan. Provincial security officials say the victims had been working in a warehouse for US forces. Terrorist attacks in Afghanistan tend to be carried out by the Taliban. After being ousted from power by a US-led coalition in 2001, the Taliban has waged an insurgency against the Afghan government and NATOs International Security Assistance Force (includes US troops). The Taliban also target private citizens whom they claim to be assisting the Afghan government or NATO forces. In addition to the Taliban, other groups such as Hezb-e-Islami are also involved in the insurgency.
At least sixty people were killed and a large number were wounded in a funeral when a suicide bomber detonated his vest in the middle of the gathering. The funeral was for a tribal leader who was involved in combating Al-Qaeda and forming Sahwa forces which is why it is almost certain that the attack was perpetrated by Al-Qaeda.The attack took place in Udhaim area in Diyala province, in a village called Al-Hiwaisat.
A suicide attacker detonated his explosives inside a funeral gathering of a tribal leader in Udheim. The Sheik was a leading member of the Diyala Sahwa council and his funeral was held in Hiwaysat village in Udheim when a suicide bomber attended and detonated his explosives.Sixty people were killed in the attack, mostly relatives and guests of the tribal leader. The wounded were in the tens but no specific number was given. The attack bears Al-Qaeda hallmarks and it doubtful that any other organization is responsible.
A local office of the Afghan government's National Solidarity Program in Alisher district of Khost province in eastern Afghanistan was set on fire. The Taliban claimed to have burned down the building. The group's spokesman said that the attackers freed the office guards after they promised not to do any such work in the future. A senior official confirmed that the building had been set ablaze but gave no details. The National Solidarity Program was created by the government of Afghanistan to develop the ability of Afghan communities to identify, plan, manage and monitor their own development projects.Terrorist attacks in Afghanistan tend to be carried out by the Taliban. After being ousted from power by a US-led coalition in 2001, the Taliban has waged an insurgency against the Afghan government and NATOs International Security Assistance Force (includes US troops). However, in addition to the Taliban, other groups such as Hezb-e-Islami are also involved in the insurgency.
Suspected militants shot dead a female health worker in the town of Baotha in Pakistan's Federally Administered Tribal Areas. An unknown number of assailants raided a health facility late on the night of April 17 and killed 35-year-old Nihar Begum. Baotha is located in Mohmand tribal district, which has a large Taliban presence. Authorities had arrested three suspects.Armed men abducted and beat 11 health workers sent to a Pakistani tribal area to administer polio vaccinations forcing the suspension of the campaign in August 2007. Prior to that attack, in February 2007, a Pakistani health official in charge of a polio inoculation campaign was killled in neighboring Bajaur district in a bomb blast.The FATA borders southeastern Afghanistan and has been considered a safe-haven for the Taliban and other foreign militants, including al-Qaeda sympathizers, since 2001. The Taliban believe that women and men do not have equal rights.
Three civilians were killed and one wounded when their vehicle hit a roadside bomb near Kabul. The road was frequently used by Afghan and international forces.
On April 18, 2008 a car belonging to the Turkish embassy in Athens was set on fire. The vehicle was destroyed but no one was injured.A car belonging to the Bosnia-Herzegovina embassy was also destroyed that night. A leftist group named the Antidemocratic Struggle Group claimed responsibility for the attack.  Authorities believe the attack was planned to demonstrate the weakness of the Greek Police.
A parked vehicle loaded with explosives went off in Al-Khadra district of Kirkuk. One civilian was killed and another four were wounded in the explosion. There is no indication of who is responsible for the attack.
An improvised explosive device hit a minibus in Diwaniya killed two passengers and wounded another five.Diwaniya is almost an exclusively Shiite town where Al-Mahdi army operate with little or no competition. It is likely that the group is responsible for the attack.
A group of about six militants opened fire on two policemen, 30 and 50, guarding a polling station at a mosque.  A bystander at the polling station was injured by a stray bullet.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
The first of three coordinated attacks against employees of the council of ministers took place in Dora. The employee was wounded in an attack by an improvised explosive device planted in a parked car.Responsibility for the attack in unclear.
One person was killed and five others were wounded when a roadside bomb targeted their minibus in Zayouna, east of Baghdad. The attack took place near the Oil Marketing Company which is a subsidiary of the Iraqi Ministry of Oil.Al-Mahdi Army is known to conduct attacks in the neighborhood due to the ease generated by its proximity to Sadr City, the group's stronghold. It is likely that Al-Mahdi Army is responsible for this attack as well.
Six Afghan police were killed in fighting sparked by a Taliban attack on a police outpost in the Arghistan district of Kandahar province.  The Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack.
A truck loaded with explosives was driven by a suicide attacker into a joint police and Sahwa checkpoint in Sofiya, at the entrance of the city of Ramadi.Four people were killed and another twenty one wounded in the attack. Al-Qaeda is responsible for the attack.
Three civilians were killed and 14 wounded when  suicide bomber blew himself up in the Spin Boldak bazaar.  Reports indicate security personnel had the bomber under surveillance and the bomber detonated his explosives when he realized he was being trailed.  Credit was not claimed for the attack although similar bombings have been attributed to the Taliban.
Early on April 23, 2008 three near simultaneous attacks took place in three separate suburbs of Athens.  The attackers firebombed a Nissan dealership and two Opel dealerships. No one was injured in the attacksOne attack destroyed three cars at a Opel dealership in the Halandri suburb of Athens.The anarchist Group of Nighttime Sabotage claimed credit for the attack.
One policemen and one police officer were wounded when an explosive charge planted on the roadside exploded in Wasiti in south Kirkuk.The responsibility for the attack cannot be determined due to the fact that more then one group operates in the area and none of the these groups claimed responsibility for the attack.
Six villagers were injured when a roadside bomb exploded near them. A report on the incident described the bombing as a legacy of the conflict between the Aceh Merdeka Movement (GAM) and TNI (sic).
An improvised explosive device targeted a police patrol near Al-Ghadeer Bridge in Zayouna district in eastern Baghdad. One civilian was killed and six others were wounded including three policemen. Zayouna is an upscale eastern neighborhood that is located near Sadr City slum which is the Mhadi Army stronghold. Repeated attacks by The Mahdi Army against the police have been registered in this area. It is most likely this attack is committed by the same group.
A district director for the Afghan national census was killed along with his driver in a Taliban ambush in Paktika Province.
Four people were wounded including two policemen when bomb went off in Al-Julan in Fallujah. The explosives were planted under the preacher seat in Al-Raqeeb Mosque.The intention is to assassinate the preacher who is obviously hosting police forces in the Mosque. This is a pattern of Al-Qaeda attacks against all religious figures and institutions that do not endorse their violent doctrine.
Taliban guerrillas attempted to assassinate President Hamid Karzai in an attack during a parade ceremony marking the 16th anniversary of the Soviet defeat.  Three people were killed, including one Afghan lawmaker.  The US embassy in Kabul confirmed that US Ambassador William Wood was present at the ceremony and was unhurt.  Reports indicate that three attackers were killed by security forces at the scene.  Multiple battles between Taliban insurgents and security forces in the Kabul area were reported for several days following the incident.  The Taliban stated that the attack was intended to disprove NATO's assertion that the insurgency was weakening.
Five people were wounded including three traffic policemen when gunmen opened fire towards a crowd of people in Al-Wathiq Square near Karadah.The area is close to Sadr's Mahdi Army activities and they have been continuously attacking police and other government targets in the area. There is a high probability that Al-Mahdi Army is behind the attack.
Unidentified insurgents attacked the home of the assistant police commander of Mogadishu's Dharkeenley District.  The assailants set fire to his house.  Shortly after the attack, a gunfight broke out between the attackers and police forces.Since routing the Union of Islamic Courts (UIC) in December in 2006, both Ethiopia and Somalia's transitional government have been combating a fierce insurgency campaign being waged by Islamic militants affiliated with the UIC.
Three policemen were wounded when a roadside bomb targeted their patrol in Tis'een district in Kirkuk. Different factions can be responsible for the attack of that scale. Unlike major suicide bombing that usually is related to Al-Qaeda, several militant groups attack government security in Kirkuk making determining responsibility for such attacks a difficult task.
Nine gunmen attacked Al-Khaldiya police station near Ramadi at a very early morning hour. One gunmen was killed and another two wounded in addition to two policemen. The group was captured by the police. Al-Qaeda usually attacks different government security forces in addition to Al-Sahwa forces in the area. It is likely that such group belongs to Al-Qaeda. The police did not announce the identity of the group but reported the incident.
Two Muslim local paramilitary were injured by a bomb hidden near their patrol station. The attacks were linked to the anniversary of the April 28, 2004 Krue Sae Mosque massacre in which Thai security forces killed 32 people in a raid on the mosque in pursuit of attackers following an insurgent strike.
The director of projects in the Ministry of Labor was killed in front of his house when he was leaving to work in the early morning.The attack took place in Attafiyah which is in a predominantly Shiite neighborhood. Several Shiite militant groups operate in the area almost exclusively. There is a high probability that one of these Shiite militant groups had performed the assassination.
The director of Sadiya town in Diyala was wounded by an improvised explosive device that targeted his vehicle. One of his guards was killed in the attack and another two civilian by-standers were wounded.The responsibility for the attack cannot be determined.
Armed insurgents attacked a World Food Program convoy sending aid to Middle Jubba Region in southern Somalia.  The attack left one aid worker wounded.  Attacks on NGO workers are common in Somalia.Since routing the Union of Islamic Courts (UIC) in December in 2006, both Ethiopia and Somalia's transitional government have been combating a fierce insurgency campaign being waged by Islamic militants affiliated with the UIC.
Unknown gunmen killed the head of the Education Department of Baraki Barak District.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
Two policemen and three civilians were wounded when an improvised explosive device targeted a police patrol passing through Al-Ghadeer district of Baghdad. Al-Ghadeer is a mostly Christian area of the capital but resides close to Al-Mahdi Army stronghold in Sadr City. It is therefore likely that the Mahdi Army is responsible for the attack.
Armed insurgents detonated a roadside bomb targeting the convoy of Burundian peacekeeping forces.  The Burundians were in the country under the auspices of the African Union (AU), which has deployed peacekeepers to Somalia in order to quell the growing violence in the country.  There were no casualties in the attack.  This was the second attack on the AU forces that same day.Since routing the Union of Islamic Courts (UIC) in December in 2006, both Ethiopia and Somalia's transitional government have been combating a fierce insurgency campaign being waged by Islamic militants affiliated with the UIC.
Unknown gunman attacked a nomad Kochi high school and killed one security guard.  No credit was claimed for the attack and local officials stated that they did not believe the Taliban were involved.
Three policemen were wounded when an improvised explosive device hit their patrol in central Kirkuk.The responsibility for the attack cannot be determined.
Authorities discovered and dismantled three remote-detonated roadside explosives on the outskirts of Tizi Ouzou.  The explosive devices were connected to cell phones.  There were no casualties in the interrupted attack.Since routing the Union of Islamic Courts (UIC) in December in 2006, both Ethiopia and Somalia's transitional government have been combating a fierce insurgency campaign being waged by Islamic militants affiliated with the UIC.
The assistant to the head of University of Baghdad Dr. Ayad Jaafar was assassinated in Al-Adel District in western Baghdad. Two of his sons were also wounded in the attack that killed their father. The responsibility for the attack cannot be predicted. Al-Adel is an area where more than one militant group has access. It is, therefore, very difficult to determine the perpetrator.
A number of militants shot dead Sarwa Abdul Wahab who was a journalist, a lawyer and a member of the independent electoral committee. The responsibility for the attack cannot be determined.
Unidentified assailants caused an electricity outage in Tak Bai district in southern Thailand's Narathiwat province by loosening screws at the base of electricity poles, causing them to collapse, and cutting power lines. Similar attacks occurred in four other districts in Narathiwat on the same day, leaving these five districts without electricity for at least 2 days. These attacks are part of the ongoing insurgency in southern Thailand which began in January 2004.
Unidentified assailants caused an electricity outage in Sukhirin district in southern Thailand's Narathiwat province by loosening screws at the base of electricity poles, causing them to collapse, and cutting power lines. Similar attacks occurred in four other districts in Narathiwat on the same day, leaving these five districts without electricity for at least 2 days. These attacks are part of the ongoing insurgency in southern Thailand which began in January 2004.
An improvised explosive device planted near the oil marketing company in Zayouna district wounded two civilians who were in the vicinity of the explosion. The oil marketing company was targeted for a second in a month and it is likely that Al-Madhi Army which operates in the area is responsible for the attack.The company is a subsidiary of the ministry of oil.
Insurgents cut off power to five districts in Narathiwat Province after sabotaging power transmission poles and cutting power lines.
A school was torched by unidentified attackers.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
Two policemen and a civilian were killed and another two policemen wounded when a number of gunmen ambushed a police patrol in western Mosul.The identity of the attackers was not determined.
A religious teacher was shot and killed while running errands.  Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
A number of militants used explosive charges to completely destroy a policeman's house in Mosul.The attack took place in Al-Yousuf district of Mosul. Al-Qaeda has repeatedly used such tactics to terrorize security forces personnel. The group is also known to have large ranging activities in Mosul and its surroundings.
Unidentified individuals removed steel nuts and bolts from three high voltage electricity towers in southern Thailand's Pattani province, causing two of the towers to fall over. The attack occurred in tambon Barahor in Muang district.  This attack is part of an ongoing insurgency in southern Thailand which began in January 2004.
An adhesive improvised explosive device was attached to a minibus in Zayouna area. One civilian was killed in the explosion and five others were severely wounded. The group responsible for the attack cannot be identified.
A group identifying itself as al-Her Hajj but identified by authorities as the al-Khobar extortion group, which reportedly has links to Abu Sayyaf, claimed responsibility for a bomb blast in Midsayap that injured five people. A separate earlier report says three were killed in the blast and at least five more were injured (AFP HK May 8).
An improvised explosive device that targeted a police patrol in Za'faraniya wounded five people, two of which are policemen.The Mahdi Army is known to frequently attack security forces in the area. It is therefore most likely that the groups is also responsible for this attack as well.
The Mujahideen Youth Movement (MYM) claimed responsibility for the attempted assassination of Somalia's finance minister.  As his convoy passed through lower Shabelle, it was ambushed by MYM forces.  The attack left four of his military bodyguards dead.  Attacks on government officials are common in Somalia.Since routing the Union of Islamic Courts (UIC) in December in 2006, both Ethiopia and Somalia's transitional government have been combating a fierce insurgency campaign being waged by Islamic militants affiliated with the UIC.
Six civilians were wounded when an improvised explosive device targeting the the deputy finance minister went off.The attack took place near the Iranian embassy across the road from the north entrance of the Green Zone. Responsibility for the attack cannot be determined but it is worth to mention that the area where the attack took place is under heavy guard by the Iraqi security forces.
On May 12, 2008 an off-duty police officer was injured by a booby-trap car bomb in the Spamount villiage area of Castlederg.  The officer, a Catholic, was not on duty at the time of the attack.Dissident republicans are believed to be responsible for the attack.
Two civilians were wounded when an improvised explosive device went off in Al-Bunouk area of Baghdad.Al-Bunouk is a predominantly Shiite area where Al-Mahdi Army operates. It is likely that the same group is also responsible for this attack as well.
An improvised explosive device targeted a police patrol near Mahmudiyah, south of Baghdad.One policeman was killed in the incident and three others were wounded. Responsibility for the attack in unclear.
On May 13, 2008, a series of eight bomb blasts took place within a span of minutes at various locations in Jaipur, a popular tourist destination 60 people were killed with 150 wounded. All the bombs were planted on bicycles and targeted markets as well as a police station. While no group claimed responsibility for the attack, the militant group Harkat-ul-Jihad-al-Islami has been blamed.
On May 13, 2008, a series of eight bomb blasts took place within a span of minutes at various locations in Jaipur, a popular tourist destination 60 people were killed with 150 wounded. All the bombs were planted on bicycles and targeted markets as well as a police station. While no group claimed responsibility for the attack, the militant group Harkat-ul-Jihad-al-Islami has been blamed.
A rocket was fired at a mast belonging to the Areeba Telecommunications Company. The mast was damaged, but no casualties were reported.
Two people were killed and another fifteen were wounded when a parked bomb exploded near the main entrance of the Islamic Party in Yarmouk - Baghdad.The group responsible for the attack remains unknown.
An al Qaeda-linked group, calling themselves the Abu Hamza Group attacked the house of MP Hazrat Ali in Jalalabad and claimed credit for killing Ali's father.  The group claimed that they kidnapped seven members of Ali's family,  a claim that could not be corroborated.  The group claimed the attack was in response to Ali's treatment of AQ fighters in the Tora Bora area during the US invasion of 2001.
The opposition Democratic Action Party Perak state headquarters were torched in a late-night firebombing attack. Two men on a motorcycle reportedly tossed explosives into the office. The DAP had been elected to power in Perak state.
One civilian was killed and three others were wounded when an improvised explosive device went off in a bus station in central Baghdad.The group responsible for the attack cannot be identified.
One civilian was killed when a bomb attached to a bicycle exploded.  Officials believe the bomber targeted a police vehicle that was passing by at the time of the explosion.  No police were injured in the attack.
A woman died and three children were wounded when a rocket slammed into their house in Sadr City.It is likely a rocket fired by Al-Mahdi Army and had strayed off target.
A bomb planted in a car park near a police station killed a policeman and five of his colleagues.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
An explosive device was found in front of a town hall in the southern Philippines. The bomb was made from a rifle grenade and included a mechanical timing device. It was found in Midsayap town in Cotabato province on the island of Mindanao. On the island Mindanao several militant groups, including the Moro Islamic Liberation Front and the New People's Army, are conducting attacks.
A hand grenade was tossed at a music and video games store in Basra causing large damage to the store. There were no reported casualties in the incident.Al-Mahdi Army is known to target various recreational businesses in the city. It is almost certain that the same militia is responsible for this attack as well.
A bomb planted under the bed of a Suq Al-Shoukh town's police chief was set off when he went to bed. Suq Al-Shyoukh is in Nasiriyah Province, which is an area of high Mahdi Army activity. It is likely that the same militia is also responsible for this attack.The police chief was killed in the incident.
Eleven new police recruits were killed when a number of gunmen stopped and attacked their minibus near Ba'aj in Nineveh province.Al-Qaeda operates in the area and continuously attacks security forces. It is almost certain that the same group is responsible for the attack.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed Maryan Said Ahmed, a member of the council of scholars and politicians, as he was walking home in Baydhabo.  Attacks on politicians and religious figures are common in Somalia.Since routing the Union of Islamic Courts (UIC) in December in 2006, both Ethiopia and Somalia's transitional government have been combating a fierce insurgency campaign being waged by Islamic militants affiliated with the UIC.
Two police and five civilians for wounded by an explosion near a police station in Gardez, Paktika Province.  The bomb had been placed in a hand-cart and remote detonated.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
A suicide attacker's house was surrounded by the police and the attacker detonated his explosives in his house killing three other members of his family including his wife and sister instead of surrendering to the police.A total of four were killed in the house and another two were wounded. The attack took place in Fallujah in Anbar Province. It is likely that the attacker is a member of Al-Qaeda.
Two people were wounded when an improvised explosive device went off in Zayouna, eastern Baghdad. The proximity of the area to Sadr City and the frequent attacks of Mahdi Army in the area makes almost certain that the group is responsible for the attack.
A rocket fired by a Taliban insurgent hit a primary school in Konar Province, killing one child and wounding four others.  Konar officials blamed the Taliban for the attack.
Rebels identifying themselves as members of the New People's Army raided a bus terminal. They seized the lone security guard's handgun and set three buses on fire before fleeing.
On May 22, 2008 a suicide bomber detonated his bomb in the Giraffe cafe in Exeter. Only the bomber was injured in the attack and there was no damage to the cafe. Two other bombs in the possession of the bomber were safely defused.The bomber, Nicky Reilly, was a 22 year old convert to Islam. Mr. Reilly is believed to be mentally challenged. The bombs were composed of  sodium hydroxide and parraffin and surrounded by nails.  Two others were questioned in the attack but not charged.
An improvised explosive device went off in a small village near Huwaijah. One civilian was killed and another three were wounded in the explosion. Responsibility for the attack cannot be determined.
Three tribal leaders were killed and four others were wounded when a adhesive improvised explosive device was attached to their vehicle in Mansour upscale neighborhood of Baghdad. Al-Mansour is still an area where Al-Qaeda can perform hit and run attacks in addition to the fact that tribal leaders are becoming a target of choice for this organization makes their responsibility for the attack almost certain.
One civilian was killed and another four were wounded when an improvised explosive device went of in Sulaikh in northern Baghdad. The area is a mixed one and there isn't much information to enable predicting the perpetrator.
An improvised explosive device was detonated in Al-Maghrib street in Adhamiyah, near the Turkish Embassy. Three civilians were wounded in addition to two policemen present at the location. The group responsible for the attack is hard to predict due to the fact that Al-Maghrib street separates between majority Sunni and majority Shiite areas of the capital. Each of these neighborhoods has its own militant groups and therefore any of these groups could be responsible.
Five people were wounded when an improvised explosive device was detonated on Baghdad International Airport highway.Responsibility for the attack cannot be determined.
An ambulance driver was wounded when his vehicle passed near an improvised explosive device in the town of Taza south of Kirkuk.Responsibility for the attack is undetermined.
Insurgents with the Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta (MEND) attacked an oil pipeline belonging to Shell that connected to the Awoba flow station in the Niger Delta.  During the attack, the militants engaged in an attack with government soldiers guarding the infrastructure, killing eleven of them.  Independent media sources confirmed the attack, and MEND later claimed responsibility for it.
Three civilians were killed when bomb exploded near a police HQ in Kandahar.
A parked car loaded with explosives was detonated in Tal Afar. The attack killed five people and wounded another forty-five. Al-Qaeda usually target the civilian population and government security forces in the town and this attack is most likely another attack by the same group.
Two police were killed and two civilian wounded when a suicide attack was carried out on a police vehicle in Lashkargah, Helmand Province.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
Unidentified assailants tossed a grenade into the home of Abdullahi Shaleyste, an MP in the Transitional Federal Government (TFG).  The attack left ten people wounded. Al-Shabaab, an Islamist insurgency, has publicly declared war against the TFG.
An improvised explosive device targeted a police patrol in the eastern side of Mosul. Three people were wounded in the attack, including two policemen.The group responsible for the attack cannot be determined.
On May 30, 2008 a series of improvised explosive devices were planted in Athens and in Thessaloniki. In Thessaloniki the targets included  banks and multiple vehicles including one belonging to the Russian Embassy. Conspiracy of Fire Cells of Thessaloniki-Athens claimed responsibility for the attack.
On May 30, 2008 FARC rebels blew up an electricity pylon on the Cuestecitas- Cuatricentenario line in Maicao Municipality.The FARC blew up a total of five pylons on this line which located near the Perija Mountain Range that day.
An improvised explosive device planted in a market in Baqubah killed three people and wounded seven others. The diversity of militant groups in the city makes predicting the attacking group a difficult undertaking.
The Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command's Jihad Jibril Brigades claimed responsibility for firing a Jihad-3 rocket at the town of Ashqelon. In the group's statement, it noted that the operation was carried out in the framework of the retaliations for the continuous Israeli aggression against the Palestinian people.
On June 1, 2008 a bomb planted outside an Amenadar office in Zaruatz a town in the Basque country exploded. The blast injured three people including two police officers and one civilian.Amenadar is the company responsible for building the high-speed rail tracks in the Basque country. This is second attack on the company in recent weeks.ETA claimed responsibility for the attack.
Unidentified assailants tossed a grenade into a cinema showing an Indian film in Gaalkacyo.  The attack killed one person and wounded at least five others.  It is not clear who was responsible, though grenade attacks on cinemas in Somalia are common.  Insurgents have been targeting them because they believe that they violate Islamic law.
Unidentified gunmen attacked  Barre Adan Shire, the former defense minister of Somalia in Kismayu.  The attack left one dead and one other injured.  Attacks on prominent government officials are common in Somalia.
On June 2, 2008 unidentified gunmen driving an Opel car opened fire on a police patrol in the Domiz Quarter of Kirkuk, killing a policeman.  No further information is provided.
On June 3, the Martyr Ahmed Abu al-Rish Brigades of Fatah claimed that it fired three Amr-2 rockets towards Karam Abu-Salim, a location east of Rafah. The group's statement argued that the attacks were a response to the occupation's ongoing crimes against the Palestinian people. No casualties or damages were reported.
One police was killed and three wounded when the Taliban attacked a coalition supply convoy in the Spini Ghbargi area of the Kabul-Kandahar Highway, Zabul Province.  The convoy was owned by a private Afghan company transporting supplies.
A bomb attached to a parked motorcycle exploded outside the Muang district municipal building in southern Thailand's Yala province, killing a municipal official and severely wounding four other individuals. The attack occurred 500 meters away from the Yala Red Crescent Fair (some media reports described it as the Red Cross Fair) at about 9:10 pm. According to Yala's deputy governor, the assailants were unable to plant the bomb in the center of the fair, so they detonated it in the parking lot outside the municipal building. Authorities believe that a militant bomb-making cell which bombed the Red Cross Fair in Narathiwat province (which is also in southern Thailand) in May 2008 was also responsible for this attack. This attack is part of the ongoing insurgency in southern Thailand that began in January 2004.
On the morning of June 3, 2008 an explosive device exploded near the Al-Ihtifalat (Celebrations Square), injuring six policemen.Various reports state that the explosion occurred at a police patrol or near the Police Academy's building which is also reportedly the premises of the Arab Bloc in the Kirkuk Governorate.
The Abu Ali Mustafa Brigades, the military wing of the Popular front for the Liberation of Palestine claimed responsibility for launching two homemade projectiles at the town of Sederot. No human or material losses were reported.
The Fatah's Buraq army, which is affiliated with the al-Aqsa Brigades, claimed it launched a homemade projectile at Sederot on the morning of June 4. No damages or casualties were reported.
At least 18 people were wounded when suspected Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) rebels set off a bomb alongside a packed commuter train. Police commanders said that the bomb had been laid on a stretch of track parallel to were the train was passing. The force of the blast split the track in half and two railway compartments were also damaged.
A bomb blast destroyed a CD shop in Kohat, Pakistan.  It completely destroyed the shop.  The attack took place amidst a spate of attacks on CD shops and threats of bombings of CD shops in the region.  In fact, this was the second such attack this week.
The Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine's Abu Ali Mustafa Brigades, as well as Fatah's al-Aqsa Brigades claimed responsibility for launching five projectiles, targeting Ashkelon, Sderot, and Tad Mordechai. No material or human losses were reported.
An explosion occurred inside a bus coming from Wathegama and going to the town of Kandy. When the bus approached a teachers' training, 12 km north of Kandy, the bomb went off. Two people were killed, 20 injured.
Four rockets were launched at the Negev city of Sderot, one of which exploded near Sapir college. The rocket damaged a building and six parked cars, and nobody was injured. According to one source, Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack.
On June 7, 2008 a suicide bomber detonated his vehicle near a police checkpoint in the al-Bahbahani area (northwest of Hilla, Babel province), wounding two policemen.  The attack reportedly occurred a half hour after the Babel governor's motorcade passed through the checkpoint.
A double bombing attack in Algeria's eastern city of Lakhdaria left at least twelve dead.  The first of the two bombings involved a roadside bomb targeting the convoy of the French construction company Razal.  This blast was followed by a second bombing, which targeted the security firm tasked with protecting the French engineer and driver wounded in the first blast.  As the security firm rushed to aid of the engineer, they were hit.
Mirzajan Nimgari, district chief of the Musa Khel district of Khost Province was murdered along with four of his bodyguards in the Qalander District.  Local officials blamed the attack on the Taliban
On the morning of June 8, 2008 a roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol vehicle in the al-Qaziriyah neighborhood of central Baghdad (close to the Turkish embassy in Baghdad), wounding five people, including two policemen.
One person was killed when unidentified gunmen assaulted the home of the Speaker of the Somali Parliament.  While the perpetrators are unknown, al-Shabaab, an Islamist insurgent group, have publicly declared war on the country's Transitional Federal Government (TFG).
A blast occurred outside the house of Magomed Khazbiyev, head of the organizational committee of the nationwide rally, in Nazran Ingushetia on June 9, 2008. Nobody was injured in the attack , according to preliminary reports. No perpetrators were identified.Politicians are frequently targeted in the Southern Caucaus republics of Ingushetia and Dagestan.
Attackers shot and killed the deputy police inspector and chief of strategy in the town of Tambon A-Song. The man was first shot and then burned along with his car.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
The al-Nasir Salah al-Din Brigades, which is the military wing of the Popular Resistance Committees, launched two Nasir rockets at Netiv Ha'asara. No material or human losses were reported.
A villager was shot in a drive-by attack in southern Thailand's Narathiwat province. The victim died on route to the hospital.This attack is a part of an ongoing insurgency in southern Thailand that began in January 2004.
The Abu Ali Mustafa Brigades of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine claimed that it launched eight mortar shells at the Nahal Oz border crossing at 12:40 pm. The group stated that it would wildly respond to the occupation's crimes. No human or material losses were reported.
On June 10, 2008 a roadside bomb planted on the road leading to al-Hajjam area in southern Souk al-Shoyoukh area (Thi-Qar province) exploded while a motorcade carrying Abdel Ali Rissan, a provincial council member, passed through, wounding four security guards.
The al-Quds brigades of Islamic Jihad claimed that it launched two homemade projectiles on the morning of June 10 at the Israeli town of Sederot. No human or material losses were reported.
The al-Qassam brigades of Hamas reportedly launched two Qassam rockets at En Hashelosha at noon. The group claimed the attack was a response to the ongoing Israeli incursions into eastern Gaza Strip and the continued aggression against our people.
On June 11, 2008 two roadside bombs targeted a police patrol passing through south of the capital in Kut, killing two policemen and wounding five others.  No further information is provided.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a driver for the World Food Programme (WFP) in the southern town of Leego in Somalia.  He was the third person working for the WFP to be killed this year.
Around 40 mortars and 13 Qassam rockets landed in the Ashqelon area of Israel, lightly to moderately wounding one Israeli woman. A Hamas spokesman argued that the attack was a response to an explosion in Beit Lahiya, noting the Palestinian resistance organizations knew how to exact the price. Reporting was unclear to whether another group other than Hamas was involved in the attack.
On June 12, 2008 a bomb exploded at the motorcade of Major General Sameer al-Wa'ili while it passed through Beirut Square (northeast Baghdad), leaving six people injured.
Two Qassam rockets and one mortar shell were reported to have landed in western Negev. No casualties or damages were reported.
At around 10 PM the lodgings belonging to the Yusekova Police Department was attacked with rockets, killing six persons-five of them police officers. The tactic, target, and location all indicate likely PKK involvement.
On June 14, 2008 an Awakening Council member was killed and another wounded when an improvised explosive device exploded near their headquarters in the village of oussuf Hammadi, Bani Saad district (south of Baqubah).  Al Qaeda has targeted Awakening Council members for their cooperation with the U.S.
On June 15, 2008 a suicide car bomb exploded at police headquarters in Tel-Keif (north of Mosul), killing a policeman and wounding six people.The suicide bomber failed to approach the building and subsequently blew his car at the outer entrance instead,.
Unidentified gunmen abducted an aid worker for CARE International in Somalia's Galgaduud region.  According to reports, the man was the director of the organization's efforts for the region and had received phone threats before being abducted.
Hamas launched a grad-type rocket towards Ashkelon, striking a cemetery and injuring an Israeli with shrapnel wounds to the neck. Israel accused Hamas of trying to derail the peace process in the attack's wake.
A suicide bomb attack occurred in the town of Vavuniya, north of Colombo when a man riding a motorcycle detonated explosives in front of a police office. Twelve people were killed, many of them policemen, and forty were injured. While no one claimed responsibility for the attack, the police say that the LTTE were behind it. Over the last month, there has been intense fighting between the Sri Lankan army and the LTTE.
Members of the Party of Free Life of Kurdistan reportedly killed three Iranian policemen in an ambush on the evening of June 17.
On the morning of June 17, 2008 a roadside bomb exploded, killing one policeman and injuring three others in Kirkuk's Wasit district.
First of four attacksA police outpost was attacked in southern Thailand. The outpost was one of three which were attacked during the same night. No fatalities or injuries were reported. Police said that separatist militants attacked the outposts in order to lure police away from a police station and plant a bomb while they were gone. As the police came back to the station a bomb exploded, killing the local chief investigator and a police sergeant. All the attacks occurred in southern Thailand's Pattani province.This attack is a part of an ongoing insurgency in southern Thailand that began in January 2004.
Second of four attacksA police outpost was attacked in southern Thailand. The outpost was one of three which were attacked during the same night. No fatalities or injuries were reported. Police said that separatist militants attacked the outposts in order to lure police away from a police station and plant a bomb while they were gone. As the police came back to the station a bomb exploded, killing the local chief investigator and a police sergeant. All the attacks occurred in southern Thailand's Pattani province.This attack is a part of an ongoing insurgency in southern Thailand that began in January 2004.
The Martyr Abu Ali Mustafa Brigades of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine claimed it fired two Sumud rockets at the Negev in response to the Israeli occupation's crimes. No human or material damages were reported.
Unidentified assailants killed a Muslim rubber tapper and his three-year-old son in a drive-by shooting before dawn. They were on their way to a rubber plantation where the man worked. According to The Bangkok Post the victims were riding a motorcycle at the time of the attack. The attack occurred in Bannang Sata district in southern Thailand's Yala province.This attack is part of an ongoing insurgency in southern Thailand that began in January 2004.
The 'izz al-Din al-Qassam Brigades of Hamas claimed responsibility for injuring three Israeli settlers near Ramallah in a drive-by shooting. The group claimed that the armed attack was in response to the fact that the Zionist occupation forces have escalated their attacks since the first hours of the ceasefire deal.
On June 20, 2008 a suicide car bomb targeted a police checkpoint in the al-Wihda neighborhood of southern Mosul.  According to a source, the suicide bomber failed to approach the checkpoint and blew up his explosive-laden car near it, injuring five policemen.
A remote-detonated landmine explosion detonated in Mogadishu's Dharkeenley District.  The attack, which targeted a police vehicle, left nine dead.  The injury total was unknown, though.
A railway policeman and three railway workers were killed when gunmen stormed a passenger train and opened fire. The train was travelling from Surathani to Sungai Kolok.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
(First of two attacks) Members of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) carried out a rocket attack on a state-run power barge in the southern Philippines. The barge was moored at the port of Lebak in Sultan Kudarat municipality in Maguindanao province. Maguindanao is located in the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao. The MILF also attacked a power plant in the same area with rockets.The Moro Islamic Liberation Front seeks an independent Muslim state on the southern Philippines island of Mindanao.
On June 22, 2008 a suicide car bomber attacked a police checkpoint in Mosul, wounding fourteen people, including four policemen. No further information is provided.
Two Afghani females were killed and their male companions injured when their vehicle struck a roadside mine.  Local officials blamed the Taliban for the attack.
Ten people  seven civilians and three soldiers  were wounded when a bomb placed near a market exploded in Yala's Muang district.Islamic insurgents in the far south of Thailand continue to target civilians, educators, police, military, as well as religious and community leaders in a campaign of drive-by shootings, arson, and bomb attacks aimed at destabilizing society and pressing for independence from Thailand. The current insurgency has been underway since January 2004 and more than 2500 people have perished from the violence.
On June 25, 2009 a 5kg bomb exploded prematurely near a police station in Ibague. A FARC rebel attempted to plant the bomb at the station; however, the device exploded prematurely killing the bomber and injuring one civilian.
Unidentified gunmen attacked the convoy of Muhammad Nur, the Deputy Police Commander of Baydhabo.  The attack left one dead and one other injured.
A cell thought to be affiliated with al-Qa'ida attempted a rocket attack on an oil refinery in the Marib Governorate. The group faced technical difficulties in loading the rockets onto the launches, causing one to launch prematurely. As a result, the perpetrators fled. Their equipment was located 3 km away from the Raydan oilfield.
Two mortar shells were launched from the Gaza strip into Israel. One of the mortars landed near Kibbutz Kfar Aza, while the other landed in an unoccupied area. No material or human losses were reported.
Moro Islamic Liberation Front fighters knocked down a transmission tower using improvised explosives built from live mortar projectiles in the southern Philippines. The tower belonged to the company TransCo and was located in a town in the second district of Cotabato province. A spokesman for the Central Mindanao police said that 20 TansCo towers have been bombed, with most of the attacks occurring in Lanao del Norte province. Three hours after the above attack,  a sub-station of the Cotabato Electric Cooperative was attacked with shoulder-fired rockets in the same province. The Moro Islamic Liberation Front seeks an independent Muslim state on the southern Philippines island of Mindanao.
Haji Abdol Bari, a tribal elder in the Greshk District of Helmand Province, was shot to death by unidentified gunmen returning from his home after evening prayers.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
An explosive placed in the entrance of a five story residential building killed two and wounded at least twenty others at 5:30 am. The explosive was connected to detonators and damaged eight shops and three stories of the building. No party claimed the attack.
On Monday, June 30 a Qassam rocket fired from Gaza landed in the Sha'ar Hanegev regional council in Negev. This rocket was launched despite the Egyptian-brokered truce between Palestinian militants and Israel. No injuries or damages were reported, nor was the attack immediately claimed.
Unidentified gunmen kidnapped four workers of the Italian NGO Water For Life.  As of mid-July, none of the workers had been released, and there was no word of a ransom demand.  In Somalia, it is often unclear whether the kidnappers are part of the Islamists or whether they are other actors with non-religious and non-ideological motives.
New People's Army fighters attacked a town hall in the southern Philippines. No deaths or injuries were reported. This attack and two other attacks on police stations by these assailants set off two days of gun battles with the police on Siargao island and Surigao del Norte province. The New People's Army is an armed unit of the Communist Party of the Philippines and has been waging an insurgency against the Philippines' government since 1969.
Three days after Judge Kamil Abdul-Majid al-Shuweili was assassinated, four other Iraqi judges were targeted in separate bomb attacks in Baghdad.A bomb exploded in front of the house of Judge Ali al-Alaf in Baghdad without any reported casualties.
The Mujahideen Youth Movement claimed credit for shelling a location where the Somali government was conducting an independence party.  There were no reports of specific numbers of fatalities or injuries.  The Mujahideen Youth Movement often targets the government of Somalia with targeted shelling.
Four police were killed and two others wounded when a bomb exploded near their vehicle in the Kutarkhana area of Urozgan Province.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
An unidentified attacker/attackers killed a local government official in southern Thailand's Pattani province. This attack is part of the ongoing insurgency in southern Thailand that began in January 2004.
Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) fighters bombed an electricity pylon in the southern Philippines' province of Cotabato, near the municipality of Pikit. According to the Philippine Star, only one of the two bombs which were attached to the pylon exploded, so the assailants were unsuccessful in knocking down the pylon. However, the attack caused residents to flee their homes. Cotabato is located on the island of Mindanao, where the MILF had carried out over a dozen attacks since June 2008.The Philippines military claimed that the attacks were intended to pressure the government to resume peace talks with the MILF. Although a MILF spokesman said that MILF leadership had not ordered these attacks, he added that field commanders were impatient with the slow pace of the peace process.  The Moro Islamic Liberation Front seeks an independent Muslim state on the southern Philippines island of Mindanao.
On July 1, 2008 a car bomb exploded near a police checkpoint in the village of al-Nadah, Khanaqin district, killing one policeman and wounding eighteen others, including eight policemen.
A Palestinian drove a bulldozer on Jaffa Road in Jerusalem, targeting a crowded bus. The man successfully used the tractor to overturn the bus, while also striking other vehicles and pedestrians. Ultimately, the attacker was shot dead when Israeli security forces jumped on the roof of the bulldozer and shot him.A group calling itself Free Men of the Galilee claimed responsibility for the attack soon after. Between two to four Israelis were reported as dead, and roughly thirty wounded as the result of the attack.
Members of the New People's Army killed three people and injured 12 others in a grenade attack in the southern Philippines. According to the Philippine Army, the attack, which occurred in Compostela Valley province, targeted motorcycle taxi drivers whom the NPA suspected as being spies for the Philippines government. An NPA spokesman asserted that the attack was the work of government intelligence agents and denied the military's charges. The New People's Army is an armed unit of the Communist Party of the Philippines and has been waging an insurgency against the Philippines' government since 1969.
The Taliban attacked a USPI convoy on the Kandahar-Herat Highway in the Zheray District of Kandahar Province.  The attack killed three security guards.  News sources were from officials in the convoy.  The Afghan government releases no official statements on the attack. This attack appears to be in coordination with a series of similar attacks on USPI assets that took place from July 5 to July 15.
A roadside bomb detonated against the convoy of the deputy commissioner,Hassan Elmi Abtidoon, of  the Yaqshid district. He was killed along with three of his bodyguards in what was the sixteenth assassination of senior officials of Mogadishu municipality.
On July 5, 2008 a roadside bomb exploded near the car of Khaled al-Ubeidi, head of the Iraqi Islamic Party in Fallujah, wounding him, his driver and a bystander.
Two police were killed in the Nawa District of Kandahar Province when Taliban gunmen attacked their outpost.
A bomb exploded outside a 7-Eleven store, injuring two members of a community security team, in southern Thailand's Yala province. According to eyewitnesses, the bomb exploded as the four-member security team was standing in front of the store. The bomb, which was hidden under a drainage cover, did not properly detonate, so the victims only sustained minor injuries. Another bomb was found in the area, but it was defused before it could explode. The attack occurred in Muang district. This attack is part of the ongoing insurgency in southern Thailand that began in January 2004.
On July 6, 2008, 16 people were killed and 53 injured in a suicide bombing near the Lal Masjid mosque in Islamabad where a rally was taking place. The rally was held to mark the first anniversary of the storming of the mosque by Pakistani commandos. The suicide bombing was an apparent revenge attack. No one claimed responsibility for the attack.
The police chief of Nawa District, Ghazni Province was killed and one other police wounded when armed gunmen attacked him during a shopping trip in Amanoddin.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
On July 7, Palestinian militants fired two mortar shells at the Qarni Border crossing. The attack, which was launched despite a cease-fire agreement between Hamas and Israel, caused no human or material losses.
On July 7, 2008 a roadside bomb exploded at a police patrol in al-Boursa region of western Mosul, injuring three policemen.
On July 7, 2008 the press reported that a member of a local anti-al Qaeda front, likely the Awakening Council group, was killed by a sniper in the town of Khan Beni Saad.  No further information is provided.Al Qaeda has targeted Awakening Council members for their cooperation with the U.S.
The police chief of Moqor District of Ghazni Province was wounded and two police killed by an attack on his vehicle.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
One security guard was killed and two other wounded when insurgents attacked a USPI Security  convoy in the Farah Rod District of Farah Province.   Five vehicles were set on fire.  This attack appears to be in coordination with a series of similar attacks on USPI assets that took place from July 5 to July 15.
The People's Defense Forces announced that the female guerrillas of the Free Women's Defense Forces and the Turkish Communist Party/Marxist Leninist- Turkish Workers and Peasants Liberation Army launched a successful attack on a police control facility, district security directorate, and district battalion hill. The People's Defense Forces claimed the attack was conducted from three sides, with the police control facility being struck first with rocket launchers at 10:40 pm. The clash allegedly lasted for forty-five minutes, killing two officers and wounding eight.
One security guard was killed and three others wounded when gunmen attacked a logistics convoy owned by the American company, USPI on the road from Kandahar to Farah in the Kanaski area of Bakwa District of Farah Province.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
On July 9, 2008, the press reported that a roadside bomb exploded at an Iraqi police 3rd contingent's patrol, at the tunnel under the 5th bridge, in western Mosul.  No further information is provided.
On July 9, 2008 a bomb placed near a courthouse in Falluja exploded, killing one person and injuring three, all of them police officers.  As rescuers reached the wounded, another bomb exploded, killing another four people.  Incident report #43414 accounts for the fatalities and injuries incurred by the first explosion.
The Imad Mughniyeh Groups of the al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades claimed responsibility for launching two rockets at the Israeli town of Sederot. The group's spokesmen claimed that the attack was in response to the killing of al-Aqsa affiliated militant Salim Jum'a al-Hamidi by Israeli Forces. In response to the attacks, Hamas arrested two Fatah militants suspected of launching the rockets. The attacks were launched despite a three-week calm agreed to by the Israeli government and Palestinian militants.
On July 10, 2008 unidentified gunmen opened fire on Brigadier Riyad Jar Allah, the head of the civil status department, killing him on the spot.  The attack occurred in Bab Sinjar area of western Mosul.
On July 11, 2008 an improvised explosive device placed under a vegetable cart exploded at a police vehicle patrol in the al-Jamassa region of eastern Mosul, injuring six civilians.
On July 12, 2008 a roadside bomb exploded on a road in the al-Aiadhiya area of Tal Afar, killing one policeman.  No further information is provided.
Two security guards of an Afghani road construction company were killed when their vehicle hit a roadside mine. The attack occurred in the Gero District of Ghazni Province.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
On July 13, 2008 two coordinated roadside bomb explosions targeted policemen in Fallujah.The first explosion occurred in front of the house of a police captain while a convoy of police vehicles arrived to take the officer to his office in the city.  The second explosion occurred shortly after police forces and bystanders gathered at the first explosion, wounding four policemen and four civilians.Incident report #43431 accounts for fatalities and injuries incurred by both explosions as those of the first explosion remains unclear.
On July 13, 2008 a roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol in the al-Maghreb Street in Baghdad's northern neighborhood of Adhamiya, injuring two policemen and two civilians.
Six security guards working for USPI were killed and two others wounded when their vehicle hit a roadside mine on the Kandahar-Herat highway in the Greshk District of Helmand Province.  This attack appears to be in coordination with a series of similar attacks on USPI assets that took place from July 5 to July 15.
On July 14, 2008 a suicide bomber opened fire with a gun on a police patrol in al-Nabi Yniss neighborhood before attempting to blow himself up.  Police authorities were able to circumvent a suicide bombing explosion from occurring by responding to his attack and killing him instantaneously.  Authorities later dismantled the attack's explosive belt, without causing any injuries.
Two Turkish engineers working for a private construction company, along with their Afghan driver, were abducted from their compound by unknown assailants.  The attack took place in the Gozara District of Herat Province in a construction industrial zone.  No credit was claimed for the abduction.  The engineers were released on July 21.  The status of the Afghani driver was not reported.
On the morning of July 15, 2008 two suicide bombers wearing explosive vests blew themselves up among dozens of Iraqi Army recruits at the Saad base in Baqubah.  One suicide bomber had reportedly disguised himself in a military uniform to infiltrate himself among the crowds.  The explosion killed twenty-eight and injured at least sixty-four people.  Incident report #43449 accounts for fatalities and injuries incurred by both suicide bombing explosions.
Judge Mahbun Elahi, head of the Logar District courts and two other judges were kidnapped by unknown assailants.  The judges were kidnapped while traveling home in the district capital of Pol-e Alam.  No credit was claimed for the kidnapping.
(Seven of seven attacks)On July 16, 2008, a bomb exploded at a  registration room in Muang district hall in southern Thailand's Yala province. No one was injured and no one claimed responsibility. On the same day, a time-bomb exploded outside the district hall's fence and another bomb exploded in a restroom inside the district hall. No one was injured in these attacks. Also on July 16, a bomb exploded at a local transport office in Yala province. It appeared to have been coordinated with a bombing outside the main police station in Yala town. During the same morning, a bomb also exploded outside the main police station in Pattani town in the adjacent province, injuring seven people, including three policemen. On the previous day, a bomb exploded near a police parking lot in Pattani's Muang district, injuring eight people, including two policemen. These attacks are part of the ongoing insurgency in southern Thailand that began in January 2004. However, it's relatively rare for attacks to occur in the downtown areas of key towns in the far south of Thailand. On July 15 the Thai government declared emergency rule over that region of the country.Note: Muang is the name given to the district in each province in Thailand where the province's main town or city is located.
(Six of seven attacks) On July 16, 2008, a bomb exploded in a restroom in Muang district hall in southern Thailand's Yala province. No one was injured and no one claimed responsibility. On the same day, a time-bomb exploded outside the district hall's fence and another bomb exploded at a registration room elsewhere in the district. No one was injured in these attacks. Also, another bomb exploded at a local transport office in Yala province. It appeared to have been coordinated with a bombing outside the main police station in Yala town, which occurred at almost the same time. During the same morning, a bomb exploded outside the main police station in Pattani town in the adjacent province, injuring seven people, including three policemen.  On the previous day, a bomb exploded near a police parking lot in Pattani's Muang district, injuring eight people, including two policemen. These attacks are part of the ongoing insurgency in southern Thailand that began in January 2004. However, it's relatively rare for attacks to occur in the downtown areas of key towns in the far south of Thailand. On July 15 the Thai government declared emergency rule over that region of the country.Note: Muang is the name given to the district in each province where the province's main town  is located.
The bodies of three police were found in the Malok area of Qarabagh District of Ghazni Province. The Taliban claimed credit for kidnapping and executing the police.  The dead police worked in Helmand Province, but lived in Nangarhar Province.
Two civilians were killed when their motorbike struck a roadside mine in the Nadir Shahkot District of Khost Province.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
(One of two attacks) Two unidentified assailants on a motorcycle shot and killed a man as he was walking home from having attended evening prayers at a mosque in southern Thailand. Within minutes of this attack, the attackers shot and killed another man at a security checkpoint 100 meters away from the site of the first killing. The victim was watching television. The attacks occurred in Penare district in Pattani province. These attacks are part of the ongoing insurgency in southern Thailand that began in January 2004.
An unidentified assailant fired a grenade launcher at a military unit at a school in southern Thailand's Pattani province, injuring one soldier. The soldiers were assigned to protect local students, teachers and villagers. The attack occurred in Penare district. This attack is part of the ongoing insurgency in southern Thailand that began in January 2004.
On July 20, 2008 a series of bombs exploded at seaside resorts in northern Spain. The second attack took place at a resort in Laredo. A small bomb exploded in a lifeguard cabin causing damage but no casualties.ETA alerted the authorities prior to each of the blasts. ETA launched this wave of bombings to protest Spain's Constitutional Court's decision to block a referendum on self-determination for the region.
On July 20, 2008 an improvised explosive device exploded near an emergency police patrol in Kirkuk city, wounding one policeman and causing damage to a civilian vehicle that was parked near the location of the blast.
Six security guards of a road construction company were wounded when insurgents opened fire on their positions in the Khala village of Qalat City, Zabol Province.  Local officials blamed the Taliban for the attack.
An unidentified assailant riding pillion on a motorcycle shot and killed a village chief in southern Thailand's Narathiwat province. The drive-by shooting occurred in Rangae district. Police put the blame on militants for the attack. This attack is part of the ongoing insurgency in southern Thailand which began in January 2004.
On July 21, 2008 a suicide bomber wearing an explosive vest approached Lt. Col. Essa al-Dulaim, the Deputy Police Chief of Fallujah, in front of his house in central Fallujah but his bodyguards shot the attacker dead.  Authorities later successfully dismantled the explosive vest.
On July 22, 2008 a roadside bomb exploded at a police patrol in Garage al-Shemal region of eastern Mosul, injuring seven civilians.
Four civilians were killed and eight wounded when their vehicle hit a roadside bomb in the Gulstan District of Farah Province.  The civilians were traveling from Gulstan to Dilaram when the bomb exploded.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
Taliban insurgents attacked district buildings in the Mohammad Agha District of Logar Province.  The insurgents used heavy arms in the attack, but did not inflict any casualties.
A series of seven bombs exploded in various locations in Bangalore, killing 2 people and injuring 20 others. The attacks were followed by the Ahmedabad bomb blasts on July 26, 2008. The third bomb blast occurred in Adugudi.It was reported that gelatin sticks were used in the bombs. According to police, timer devices were attached to all of the bombs and mobile phones were used to trigger the devices.No one claimed responsibility for the attack.
A series of seven bombs exploded in various locations in Bangalore, killing 2 people and injuring 20 others. The attacks were followed by the Ahmedabad bomb blasts on July 26, 2008. The seventh bomb exploded along Richmond Circle. It was reported that gelatin sticks were used in the bombs. According to police, timer devices were attached to all of the bombs and mobile phones were used to trigger the devices.No one claimed responsibility for the attack.
A series of 16 bombs exploded through various locations in Ahmedabad, leaving 49 people killed and 145 injured. The blasts were considered to be of low intensity and targeted the city's bus service. The bombs, like the Jaipur bombings earlier in the year, were planted on bicycles. Islamic militant group, Harkat-ul-Jihad-al-Islami claimed responsibility for the attack.
A series of 16 bombs exploded through various locations in Ahmedabad, leaving 49 people killed and 145 injured. The blasts were considered to be of low intensity and targeted the city's bus service. The bombs, like the Jaipur bombings earlier in the year, were planted on bicycles. Islamic militant group, Harkat-ul-Jihad-al-Islami claimed responsibility for the attack.
A series of 16 bombs exploded through various locations in Ahmedabad, leaving 49 people killed and 145 injured. The blasts were considered to be of low intensity and targeted the city's bus service. The bombs, like the Jaipur bombings earlier in the year, were planted on bicycles. Islamic militant group, Harkat-ul-Jihad-al-Islami claimed responsibility for the attack.
A series of 16 bombs exploded through various locations in Ahmedabad, leaving 49 people killed and 145 injured. The blasts were considered to be of low intensity and mainly targeted the city's bus service.One of two bombs targeted a hospital where many of the victims were taken. The bombs, like the Jaipur bombings earlier in the year, were planted on bicycles. Islamic militant group, Harkat-ul-Jihad-al-Islami claimed responsibility for the attack.
Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) fighters set fire to houses in a village in the southern Philippines' province of Cotabato (Mindanao island). They had initially attacked soldiers, and perhaps militia members, in the village. Then, before they retreated, they set several houses on fire.The MILF claimed that military-supported government militias attacked them and denied that they had burned houses. The village was located in Aleosan town. The attack follows the collapse of peace talks between the MILF and the Philippines government on July 25. The MILF claimed that the government reneged on a deal to give Muslims a homeland in the Philippines. The Moro Islamic Liberation Front seeks an independent Muslim state on the southern Philippines island of Mindanao.
On July 27, 2008 a coordinated attack on Zaki Obaid Fayadh, head of the local head of the Iraqi Islamic Party in Fallujah, wounded him and his son and killed two of his bodyguards.Unidentified gunmen opened fire on the house of Zaki Obaid Fayadh in the Dhubbat neighborhood in central Fallujah.  Shortly after, a bomb planted under the car exploded as the driver started the engine and Fayadh and his son were approaching the car. Incident report #43480 accounts for fatalities and injuries incurred by both attacks.
On July 28, 2008 a bomb exploded at a construction camp near the city of Orio in the Basque Country.  The blast damaged six huts and four vehicles belonging to a construction working on  a regional highway.ETA has targeted transportation projects in the past in this region..
On July 28, 2008 a woman suicide bomber blew herself up among a crowd of Kurds protesting a provincial elections measure, killing fifteen people and wounding at least eighty people.After the explosion, which caused chaos among protesters, Kurdish protesters were reported to attack the offices of a Turkmen political party.No one has claimed responsibility for this attack, although U.S. authorities believe Al Qaeda in Iraq is responsible for such attacks involving women suicide bombers in Iraq.
A explosion struck a vehicle in the convoy of member of parliament Layeq Manzel in the Patan District of Paktika Province.  The explosion destroyed the vehicle following Mr. Manzel vehicle, killing three and wounding three others.  Mr. Manzel was no hurt in the attack.No credit was claimed for the attack.
Unidentified assailants attacked a police station in southern Thailand's Pattani province. The attack occurred in Sai Buri district. This attack is part of the ongoing insurgency in southern Thailand which began in January 2004.
Five employees of the NGO, Development Alternatives, Inc. were kidnapped by unknown assailants in the Kuz Sabar area of Pachir Agam district of Nangarhar Province.  The kidnapped included an engineers, his guards, drive and another company employee. No credit was claimed for the abduction.
On July 31, 2008 a suicide car bomber rammed his explosives-laden vehicle against the wall of a police station in the Qayara area, south of Mosul, killing three policemen and wounding four others.  The day prior, the Islamic State of Iraq, an al-Qaida front group, warned of a campaign of attacks in the Mosul area in retaliation for the killing of one of its hero brothers.
Three civilians were killed, including two children, and five others were wounded when a suicide bomber detonated his explosives in a residential area of Zaranj, Farah Province.  The bomber had been detected and chased by security forces before the explosion.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
Gunmen with the Taliban shot and killed a policeman and a civilian in an assault in Nad Ali.  Attacks on police forces are common in Afghanistan.
A grenade was lobbed at a wealthy businessman who sells qat.  The attack, which took place in Somalia's Beledweyene, left the victim seriously injured.  Attacks on those who sell qat are common in Somalia.
On August 2, 2008, the home of a UC Santa Cruz professor was fire bombed. No one was injured in the attack. The professor due to the nature of his research used mice in the laboratory. His name was one of thirteen researchers listed on a threatening pamphlet found in downtown coffee shop in Santa Cruz. The Animal Liberation Front later claimed credit for the attack.It is believed this attack was coordinated with another nearby attack on a researchers vehicle.
(Two of seven attacks) A small bomb exploded at a 7-Eleven convenience store in Songkhla town in southern Thailand (Songkhla province, Muang district). The attack was one of seven bombings which occurred  within a matter of hours on the night of August 2 in Songkhla province. Five of the attacks occurred in Muang district and two attacks occurred in Hat Yai district. Two people were injured in the Muang district attacks. Four of the bombings targeted 7-Eleven stores. Songkhla province borders the three provinces in the far south of Thailand where an insurgency is ongoing. These attacks are part of that insurgency which began in January 2004.The Runda Kumpulan Kecil (RKK), an armed organization controlled by the Barisan Revolusi Nasional Coordinate (BRN Coordinate), is suspected of being responsible for the attacks.  Security agencies suspect that three Islamic teachers, believed to be the main leaders of the BRN Coordinate, directed RKK militants to carry out terrorist attacks in Songkhla province. Two previous attempts by the RKK to carry out attacks in Songkhla since April 2008 had been disrupted.The Songkhla town mayor said that he believed the attacks were intended to scare, not kill, people, because they were less powerful than bombs used in other attacks in southern Thailand.
(Seven of seven attacks) A small bomb exploded near a tea house and a Carrefour supercenter in the Hat Yai district of Songkhla province in southern Thailand. Hat Yai district is a popular tourist destination in southern Thailand. The attack was one of seven bombings which occurred within a matter of hours on the night of August 2 in Songkhla province. Five of the attacks occurred in Muang district and two attacks occurred in Hat Yai district.Two people were injured in the Muang district attacks. Four of the bombings targeted 7-Eleven stores. Songkhla province borders the three provinces in the far south of Thailand where an insurgency is ongoing. These attacks are part of that insurgency which began in January 2004.The Runda Kumpulan Kecil (RKK), an armed organization controlled by the Barisan Revolusi Nasional Coordinate (BRN Coordinate), is suspected of being responsible for the attacks.  Security agencies suspect that three Islamic teachers, believed to be the main leaders of the BRN Coordinate, directed RKK militants to carry out terrorist attacks in Songkhla province. Two previous attempts by the RKK to carry out attacks in Songkhla since April 2008 had been disrupted.The Songkhla town mayor said that he believed the attacks were intended to scare, not kill, people, because they were less powerful than bombs used in other attacks in southern Thailand.
On August 3, 3008, a roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol vehicle in Mahaweel, wounding four policemen and three civilian bystanders.
Four police, including the police district chief of Zana Khan District, were killed and seven others were wounded in an attack by Taliban insurgents.  The Taliban attacked the police in a convoy during a patrol of Gudaly Village.
Guerrillas killed Dost Mohammad, district attorney of Zormat, Paktika Province.  Mohammad's body was found in the Tatank area on the outskirts of the district HQ.  Local officials blamed the Taliban for the attack.
Gunmen with the Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta (MEND) kidnapped nine chieftains who were part of the People's Democratic Party (PDP) in Ondo State.  The MEND kidnappers did not didn't issue any ransom demands other than insisting that the local government hand over its arms and ammunition, which MEND claimed that they had no constitutional right to carry.
Gunmen with the Taliban shot and killed the son, cousin, and driver of the director of the National Security Department, Mr. Nur Khan.  There were no reports of Mr. Khan being harmed in the assassination attempt, though the Taliban claimed that they killed him.  In addition, a fourth man was killed.  Attacks on government officials are common in Afghanistan.
PKK separatists reportedly fired rockets at a police station in the town of Malazgirt, which is located in Eastern Turkey. One police officer was killed and three were wounded in the attack, although the group claimed it killed three and wounded five.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed Abdulkadir Yusf Kariye, the head of a Mogadishu-based boys orphanage.  Kariye was shot to death outside of his home.  Attacks on members of Mogadishu's civil society are commonplace.
On August 7, 2008 Mahmoud Younis, a leader in the Iraqi Islamic Party in Mosul, and one of his bodyguards were killed as they departed for work from Younis' house in the al-Mashahda neighborhood of western Mosul.Younis was also a preacher at the Imam Basher mosque and the director of Islamic secondary education at the Sunni Endowment department.
On August 8, 2008, the Jund al-Yemen Brigades of al-Qa'ida in Yemen threw a grenade at a police car guarding a bridge in al-Mukalla city in the Hadr Mawt governorate. The attack did not inflict any casualties or damages. In the attack claim, the group argued that the operation was conducted as support for our captured brothers in the tyrant's prison.
On August 8, 2008 a suicide car bomber drove his car into a market in Tal Afar, killing twenty five persons and injuring at least seventy-two others.  Authorities believe that the explosion was executed by a Sunni Turkoman suicide bomber from Tal Afar, whose identity was established after forensic tests on his remains.  He had been released from detention four months ago under an amnesty passed by parliament earlier this year.  Authorities also believe that the suicide bomber may have avoided detection at a checkpoint leading to the market by having a man ride with him in the passenger seat, overcoming a ban that Tal Afar has established on males driving alone.  The passenger is believed to have gotten out of the car soon after it passed the checkpoint.
The Taliban fired five rockets at a radio station (Radio Voice of Freedom) in Faizabad.  One rocket hit the station and wounded a local guard.  The Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack.
(Three of Four attacks) Assailants attacked a county public security bureau in western China, killing a civilian and a security guard. The attack also injured a security guard, two police officers and one civilian. The attack occurred in Kucha city between 3:20 am and 4 am as security personnel and police officers were on their way to deal with other attacks. The assailants drove a motor tricycle through the gate and detonated the tricycle's gas tank. The explosion killed two of the attackers. Xinhua reported that all of the identified attackers were Uyghurs. It also destroyed two police cars. Xinhua reported that the explosives used on August 10 were built from bent pipe, gas canisters and liquid gas tanks. These attacks followed an attack on paramilitary police in Xinjiang's Kasghar city on August 4. The Uyghurs are a Turkic ethnic group, primarily living in Xinjiang and Central Asia. Before the People's Republic of China took control of Xinjiang, there were two independent Uyghur republics which successively ruled Xinjiang, then called East Tukestan, in the late 1930's and 1940's. Today, some Uyghurs still call Xinjiang East Turkestan. Although, it has not claimed responsibility for the attacks, a group called the Turkestan Islamic Party had previously threatened to attack the Beijing Summer Olympics.
On August 10, 2008 a car bomb exploded as a  patrol escorting a finance ministry convoy passed by, killing an Iraqi soldier and two civilians.  At least nine people were injured in the attack, among them four soldiers.
Unidentified assailant(s) shot a police officer in southern Thailand's Narathiwat province. The officer is the head of a suppression unit at the police station in Tak Bai district, where the attack occurred. At around 5:30 am, he was walking to a mosque to attend morning prayers when we was shot and severely injured. Despite being shot in the head, he was able to fire back. This attack is part of the ongoing insurgency in southern Thailand that began in January 2004.
The convoy of Ghazni's Governor Mohammad Osman Osmani was attacked in the Sayedabad District of Wardag Province as it drove to Kabul.  The Governor escaped unharmed, but two of his bodyguards were wounded.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
Unidentified assailants attacked a family of four in a drive-by shooting in southern Thailand's Narathiwat province. Both the attackers and the victims were driving pick-up trucks at the time of the attack. After taking fire from the assailants, the driver in the family's truck lost control of the vehicle. The truck crashed into an electricity pole and turned over. The father and his daughter were killed, while the mother and her son were critically injured. The attack occurred in the morning in Rangae district. This attack is part of the ongoing insurgency in southern Thailand that began in January 2004.
Five police were killed and four others wounded when their vehicle hit an improvised explosive device (IED) while on patrol in the Marja District of Helmand Province. The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
Unknown assailants killed a forty-two year old man who had recently joined the municipal guard.  He was found with his throat slit north of Bouira, in Tizi Oujaboub.
On August 13, 2008 a car parked on a street by a popular marketplace in the al-Qayara district of Mosul exploded, killing two people and wounding six others.
A bridge on the Kandahar-Herat Highway was destroyed by explosives in the Delaram District of Farah Province.  Local officials blamed the Taliban for the bombing.
On August 14, 2008 as several bombings have occurred killing Shiite worshippers heading to Karbala to celebrate a religious holiday, a woman suicide bomber blew herself up among a crowd of Shiites pilgrims who were resting on the side of the road in Iskandariya, where women were cooking dinner, men were praying, and children were playing nearby.  The explosion killed twenty-two people and wounded at least seventy-three. There have been conflicting reports as to the number of women suicide bombers involved in this attack.  U.S. authorities, however, believed only one woman was behind this attack.
On August 15, a rocket was fired into an area just south of Ashqelon. The attack was unclaimed and did not cause any human or material losses.
A bomb exploded at a motorcycle shop in southern Thailand's Yala province. The attack occurred in Yaha district in the morning. No fatalities or injuries were reported. This attack is part of the ongoing insurgency in southern Thailand that began in January 2004.
On August 15, 2008 a medium intensity bomb exploded in Ituango during the city's anniversary party.  The blast killed seven people including the mayor's cousin and wounded another 51 people, many of them seriously.The bomber, a member of the FARC, was apprehended soon after the detonation. Police spotted him prior to the detonation but were unable to stop him before he detonated the device by a cell phone.
Two Iranian road workers were kidnapped by unidentified gunmen while working on the Herat-Islam Qala Highway.  The workers were identified as Raza Azimian and Hassan Farsi.  The two workers were traveling without security guards and went missing while heading toward Islam Qala in the Kohsan District.  No credit was claimed for the kidnapping.
On August 16, 2008 a rocket propelled grenade was fired at police on patrol in Fermanagh County, Northern Ireland. The three officers on patrol were were lightly injured in the attack; however the device failed to detonate.Authorities believe ex-members of the North Armagh republican brigade are responsible for this attack.
Members of al-shabaab shot and killed a businessman who was part of an anti-terrorism alliance in the country.  Ise Usman Ali was one of the eleven founders of the alliance, which formed in 2006.  He was killed in Mogadishu along with his bodyguard and a nearby civilian.  Al-Shabaab later claimed credit for the attack.
On August 17, 2008 a series of bombs exploded in Malaga on the Costa del Sol.  The attacks caused no injuries or damage.Two bombs exploded simultaneously at Guadalmar Beach in Malaga. No causalities or damage was caused by the small explosion.ETA claimed credit for the attack. The attacks are similar to a series of bombings conducted by ETA in northern Spain in July 2008.
A small bomb exploded outside the home of Nepal's vice president, Paramananda Jha, injuring one person. Jha was unhurt in the blast. No one claimed responsibility for the attack.
Two police were killed and six others wounded when their vehicle hit a roadside mine in the Park area of Farm Hada, Nangarhar Province. No credit was claimed for the attack.
Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) fighters attacked civilians in Sultan Kudarat province in the southern Philippines. An unknown number of civilians were killed or injured. It is thought that the fighters are upset about the break-down in peace talks between the Philippines government and the MILF. Sultan Kudarat province is located on the island of Mindanao. The Moro Islamic Liberation Front seeks an independent Muslim state on Mindanao.
On August 18, 2008 unidentified gunmen opened fire on the vehicle of Sheikh Faris Jabir Dhahir in Baghdad's southeastern neighborhood of al Zaafaraniya, killing him and severely wounding his wife and daughter.  The cleric had been working for the Shiite Shahid al-Mihrab Foundation, which is headed by the son of Abdelaziz al-Hakim, the chief of the Supreme Islamic Iraqi Council and also the head of the Shiite Unified Iraqi Council (UIC).
A suicide bomber driving a car packed with explosives targeted a police school in the town of Issers.  The attacker drove into a crowd of people that were assembled outside of the building waiting for an entry exam, the bomber ultimately killed forty-three people and wounded another thirty-eight.  Both civilians and police forces were among the victims.
A suicide bomber driving a car drove full of explosives rammed into a bus full of a group of Algerian workers, ultimately killing twelve people and injuring forty-four.  The bus was waiting for a group of Canadians working at a water purification plant.
Two citizen were found with their throats slit in Beni Bechir, part of Skikda in Algeria.  This incident fits a pattern of recent attacks against off duty policemen and soldiers, in which the victims were found with their throats slit.
Twelve employees of the Afghan National De-mining Commission were abducted by unknown gunmen in the Milan area east of Gardez city, Paktika Province.  The employees were apparently traveling without security guards.  The Taliban deny involvement with kidnapping and some local officials blamed armed robbers.
On August 21, 2008, a double suicide attack on the Pakistan Ordnance Factory, an arms factory killed at least 70 people, wounding 67.  The incident occurred in the town of Wah. The attack is the deadliest on a military site in Pakistan's history. The Pakistan Ordnance Factory is the center of Pakistan's defense industry. Both bombers detonated themselves at the gates of the factory as workers were changing shifts. The first explosion occurred at the main gate. Tehrik-e-Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack, saying it was response to the army's violence against militants in the NWFP.
An explosion occurred at an electricity substation in Baku, Azerbaijan on August 22, 2008. There were two deaths.The Islamist Forest Brothers group, responsible for a bombing at a mosque in Baku on August 17, 2008, was eventually found guilty of the attack. The group had been caught previously in 2007 for both criminal and terrorist acts.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed Muhammad Isa Diriye, a Wadajir district judge, in Mogadishu.  Shakyh Hasan, the judge, was shot right after he left the court for his house.  Attacks on Somalia's civil service are common in the country.
Ten civilians were killed and four others wounded when their minibus hit a roadside mine on the Kandahar-Uruzgan Highway, north of Kandahar City.  The dead included two children.  Local officials blamed the Taliban for the attack.
On August 24, 2008 a suicide bomber blew up his explosive-laden vest as police and members of the Awakening Council group sat down to dinner in the Abu Ghraib district, killing at least twenty-one people and wounding thirty-two others.  Aziz Moklif Ghatha al-Zubai, one of the local chiefs of the Awakening Council group who organized the dinner in the district's Al-Zaidan village, was killed in the attack.  Al-Zaidan village is known to be a former Al-Qaeda stronghold.  Al Qaeda has frequently warned Awakening Council members that they will be specially targeted because of their cooperation with the U.S. military.
On August 24, 2008 unidentified gunmen fired gunshots from a car on the van of cleric Haider al-Saymari, a follower of Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani and a well known critic of extremists and armed groups in Basra, as he traveled back to Iran through downtown Basra.  Al-Saymari was rushed to a nearby hospital where he was pronounced dead.  His wife, mother, and sister were left unharmed.
On August 26, 2008 a suicide bomber blew himself up among a crowd of police recruits lining up outside a police station in Jalawlaa in Diyala province.  The suicide bomber is said to have arrived at the site in his car and stopped by the police.  Then, jumped from his car and ran into the crowd to blow himself up.
On August 28, 2008 a small bomb was thrown at the National Defense Supreme Council of the Armed Forces in La Paz.  The device caused no causalities and only minimal damage.  Authorities are not sure who is behind the attack; however, the relationship between the central government and the eastern provinces leadership has been tense.
Unidentified gunmen shot and wounded a World Food Program (WFP) official.  The attack left Ali Nasir injured, as he sustained bullet wounds in his shoulder and neck.  Attacks on NGOs are increasingly common in Somalia.
On September 1, 2008 a car bomb exploded in front of the Palace of Justice in downtown Cali.  The blast killed four people and wounded twenty-six others; the blast caused extensive damage to the Palace of Justice and damaged the nearby Attorney General's Office and the Aristi Hotel.Columbian Police intercepted communications that indicate the FARC are responsible for the attack.
On the morning of September 2, 2008 two roadside bombs detonated near an Iraqi police patrol close to the Kendi Hospital in the Nahdha area of central Baghdad.   A policeman and civilian were killed; two policemen and three civilians were wounded.  Two police vehicles were also damaged.
A roadside bomb exploded near a military team assigned to escort teachers in southern Thailand's Yala province. The bomb slightly damaged two patrolling pickup trucks, but none of the soldiers were injured. The soldiers were patrolling the road before teachers went to work. This attack is part of the ongoing insurgency in southern Thailand that began in January 2004.
In the late evening of September 5, 2006, the convoy of former Deputy Prime Minster Ahmed al-Chalabi was the target of a suicide bombing explosion.  A suicide bomber drove his explosive-laden car into Chalabi's convoy, which Chalabi was reportedly not in during the attack.  Four of Chalabi's bodyguard were among the six people killed; seventeen others were injured by the suicide bombing.
Militants with al-shabaab shelled the home of the Speaker of the Parliament, Adan Madobe, along with the airport in a mortar attack in the city of Baydhabo.  There was no report of the death of the Mr. Madobe.  Mortar attacks on official state houses are common in Somalia.
On September 7, 2008 there were four unrelated roadside bomb explosions occurring in different locations of Baghdad that the press had reported.  The first of four roadside bomb attacks targeted an Iraqi police patrol in the Beirut Square in eastern Baghdad, wounding three policemen.
The Taliban destroyed a bridge on the Kabul-Kandahar Highway in the Ghashi area of Shar-e safa District, Zabol Province during fighting with government forces.
An improvised explosive device exploded near the entrance to a market in the southern Philippines. The explosion caused minimal damage and no fatalities or injuries were reported. A garbage collector found the bomb and notified authorities, however, it exploded before security personnel arrived. The bomb exploded at 4:30 am in the town of Isulan in Sultan Kudarat province. A military spokesman said that the attackers had probably intended for the bomb to detonate a hour later, because the market didn't open until 5 am.
Two rockets, fired from an unspecified direction, struck the Shaskarak area of Kabul.  No casualties were reported and no credit was claimed for the attack.
An explosive charge planted in the car to transport Jawad al-Hattab, the director of al-Arabiyah Bureau in Baghdad, was discovered.  Although the driver informed the police of the bomb, it exploded before they could defuse it.
On September 10, 2008, militants launched a grenade-and-gun attack in a mosque in Banai village in the NWFP. The attack left 25 people dead and injured 50. According to police, three grenades were thrown into the mosque.It is believed that the Taliban were behind the attack.
One police and one civilian were killed and seven civilians wounded when a suicide bomber detonated his explosives outside a mosque in the Khash Rod district of Nimroz province.  The bomber targeted a police vehicle.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
On September 11, 2008, a bomb described as a magnetic bomb and planted in the car of two civilians exploded, wounding both civilians.
On the afternoon of September 12, 2008, a suicide bomber wearing an explosive vest blew himself up among a crowd of Muslim worshippers outside the mosque after they finished Friday noon prayer in the town of Sinjar, Nineveh province.  The explosion killed 2 and wounded 15 others.
This is fourth of five bombs that exploded in New Delhi. A series of five synchronized bomb blasts occurred in Delhi on September 13, 2008. At total of 30 people died and over 90 people were injured. The fourth explosion happened in M Block market in Greater Kailash-I at 6:37, near the popular Prince Paan Corner. Eyewitnesses claim the explosives were loaded on a bicycle near Prince Paan Corner - the bomb was of low intensity and ball bearings were used to maximize the impact. The Indian Mujahideen, a relatively unknown group, claimed responsibility for that attack. Earlier that year, they have claimed responsibility for a series of bomb attacks in Jaipur and in Ahmedabad.
On 13 September, the Freemen of Gaililee Brigades claimed it stabbed a settler and burned down a house belonging to a Rabbi in Yitzhar, Nabulus. The group dedicated the attack to the parents who lost their child at the Huwarah roadblock on 12 September.
Two doctors working for the World Health Organization were killed and 15 others wounded when a suicide car bomber attacked their convoy in the Spin Boldak district of Kandahar Province.  The doctors were reportedly on a mission to distribute vaccines to children in the area.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
A remote-detonated roadside bomb rocked a convoy of Ugandan peacekeepers part of the African Union (AU) peacekeeping contingent tasked with supporting the Transitional Federal Government (TFG).  The attack, which took place on the road linking the airport to the rest of Mogadishu, left seven Ugandans dead and wounded at least two others, making it one of the more deadly attacks against the AU forces in the country.  Al-Shabaab has publicly declared war on the AU forces.
Militants with the Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta (MEND) claimed credit for an attack on two separate oil installations.  The militants destroyed parts of Royal Dutch Shell's Soku gas plant in one of the attacks and also claimed to have killed at least twenty-two soldiers guarding the plant.  Royal Dutch Shell refuted the claim that any soldiers were killed.This attack came alongside another attack targeting Chevron Corporation's Kula oil station.
The district chief of Shindand in Herat province was the target of a suicide car bomb which killed three and wounded seven.  The district chief survived the attack with minor injuries, but his son was among the dead when a pedicab filled with explosives detonated outside the district government compound.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
On September 10, 2008 a bomb was discovered under policeman car in Bilbao. The 1kg cloratita bomb was discovered by the officer after he arrived at the police station. The bomb did not detonate and it was disposed off without incident.Authorities suspect ETA was responsible for the attack because they have used this tactic and explosive in the past.
Two roadside bombs exploded at a crowded popular market in Taji, killing two people and injuring 13 others.  The explosion also caused extensive damage to several shops and stalls in the marketplace.  The incident occurred as U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates is visiting Iraq to preside at the change-of-command ceremony from General Petraeus to Lieutenant General Ray Odierno.
On September 17, 2008 a bomb exploded outside the office of the a health service company in Ipiales. The blast caused moderate damage to the building but no casualties.The FARC are believed to be responsible for the attack.
On September 17, 2008 a roadside bomb explosion near the convoy of Esam al-Timimi, the local mayor of Baghdad's al-Jadida district, was reported.   No further information is provided.
On September 18, 2008, unidentified assailants set a school building on fire in southern Thailands Yala province. The fire destroyed three classrooms, a teacher's room, and a computer room. No one claimed responsibility. This attack is part of the ongoing insurgency in southern Thailand that began in January 2004.
On September 19, 2008 a house belonging to a couple from mainland France was bombed in Sari-Solenzara, a town in Corsica. There were no casualties in the attack but the house was damaged.There were no claims of responsibility for the attack; however, Corsican separatist have targeted mainland French interest in recent months.
On September 20, 2008, a truck filled with explosives detonated in front of the Marriott Hotel in the capital of Islamabad. The attack killed 54 people, injuring 266 people. Two American military personnel went missing and were presumed to be dead. The suicide bombing happened just hours after President Zardari made his first speech to the parliament. The Marriott Hotel was extremely prestigious and a popular site for both foreigners and the Pakistani elite.   Pakistan's top leaders were scheduled to meet in the hotel before the attack took place, but changed the venue at the last minute. The blast caused a natural gas leak which set the top floor of the hotel on fire. More than half of the building was destroyed by the fire. It is unclear who was behind the attack. The Taliban denied responsibility while many blame the militant group, Harkat-ul-Jihad-al-Islami, for the attacks.
On September 21, 2008, Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) militants set fire to 16 houses and three government buildings, including health care facilities, in a village in the southern Philippines' province of Maguindanao (Mindanao island). No injuries or fatalities were reported. The MILF did not claim responsibility for the attack. However, the MILF has been setting fire to houses in villages on Mindanao since the beginning of August, when the Philippines' supreme court blocked a peace accord between the MILF and the Philippines government. The accord would have created a Muslim homeland in the southern Philippines. Note: A military spokesman identified the leaders of the attack as MILF leaders. However, the AFP reported that the MILF has disowned them.
On September 21, 2008 Ghassan Redha, Director General in the Finance Ministry, was wounded when a magnetic bomb planted in his car exploded while driving in the Harthiya neighborhood.
On September 21, 2008 a suicide bomber drove an explosive-laden truck into the entrance of a police commando base in southwestern Mosul.  The explosion killed at least two policemen and wounded forty civilians.
On September 21, 2008 a 100kg car bomb exploded in front of the Virgen del Puerto Military Trust in the town of Santona in the Cantabria region of northern Spain.  The blast killed one officer and injured 6 others including one seriously.  The blast also caused significant damage to the military school.ETA claimed responsibility for the attack. This was the third of three car bomb attacks that occurred this week in Spain.
On September 23, 2008 a roadside bomb exploded in the predominately Shiite neighborhood of Zaafarnaiya, leaving a civilian injured.
On 24 September a pipe bomb exploded outside the home of left-wing Israeli activist professor Zeev Sternhell. He was injured lightly due to the attack. No group claimed immediate responsibility, although right-wing Israeli militants were suspected.
One civilian was killed and one civilian and one police were wounded when a roadside bomb destroyed a bus carrying police trainers on the Commando Road in Kandahar City. No credit was claimed for the attack.
Two civilians and one National Directorate of Security worker were killed and five civilians wounded when a suicide bomber detonated his explosive the the Jaji Maydan district bazaar of Khost Province.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
A bomb attack on a train in Bahawalpur left three people dead and 15 other wounded. The bomb was left on the railway track, exploded and derailed the passenger train.No one claimed responsibility for the attack.
At 3am on 27 September Palestinian militants shot at two Israeli vehicles near Qalqilyah, in the West Bank. The attack led to both vehicles being damaged, and one driver receiving light wounds. A group referring to itself as the rural based al-Aqsa Brigades, which is aligned with Fatah, claimed responsibility for the attack. The group claimed the shooting was in retaliation for ongoing Israeli arrest campaigns.
Three police and three civilians were killed and five police and 12 civilians were wounded when a suicide bomber on a motorbike exploded himself near a police vehicle in the Spin Boldak District of Kandahar Province.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
On September 28, 2008, unidentified assailants shot and killed a village chief in southern Thailands Pattani province. The victim was walking home from a meeting with a military peace-keeping unit. No one claimed responsibility. This attack is part of the ongoing insurgency in southern Thailand that began in January 2004.
A remote-detonated bomb targeting a pick-up truck with a policemen inside.  All three policemen survived the attack, but the explosion killed a child.  The attack left the policemen wounded along with another civilian.  It was not immediately clear who was behind the attack.
On Oct 1st 2008, a sidewalk vendor in Sultan Kudarat Province alerted police of a suspicious looking package.  Police then found the package to contain an improvised explosive device fashioned out of a 60mm mortar shell with a mobile phone triggering device, and disposed it.  Southern Philippines has been the site of many bombings over in recent years.  The local military presence suspects that the bomb was intended to spread fear throughout the island of Mindanao.
A series of five bombs exploded in Agartala, the capital of Tripura in northeastern India. The attacks all occurred within 45 minutes. In total, 5 people were killed and 100 were injured.  The bomb blasts were of low-intensity. One of the bombs exploded in the main shopping bazaar of Maharaja Ganju Bazar. While it is unclear who was behind the attacks, the police blamed the Indian Mujahideen
On October 2, 2008, five people were killed and 20  wounded in an apparent assassination attempt targeting one of Pakistan's leading Pasthun politicians, Asfandyar Wali Khan. Khan, the chief of the secular Awami National Party, survived the attack.The Awami National Party is a fierce opponent of the Taliban. No group claimed responsibility for the attack.
On Oct 3, 2008 an unidentified assailant hurled a grenade into a public area injuring nine bystanders in Claver, a town in the southern Philippines province of Surigao de Norte.The attack is suspected to be a part of an ongoing insurgency in southern Philippines carried out by MILF (Moro Islamic Liberation Front).
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed Ibrahim Shaykh, the head of the security service in Bayhabo.  According to witnesses, Shaykh was shot at the market in the center of the city by three armed men, wearing masks, with a pistol who subsequently fled the scene.  NOTE: The Mujahideen Youth Movement later claimed credit for the attack in a claim posted on October 5, 2008.  Moreover, the attackers claimed that Ibrahim Shaykh was targeted because he was the intelligence head for the country.
A remote-controlled bomb destroyed a small bridge in front of the Herat Province Governor's residence.  No casualties were reported and the police stated that two people, an Iranian and a Pakistani had been arrested in connection with the explosion.
The Mujahideen Youth Movement (MYM) claimed credit for an attack on the Speaker of the Parliament's home in Baidoa.  They shelled the Speaker's house, claiming a number of casualties.  However, none were reported on behalf of the speaker.  Attacks on members of government are common in Somalia.
An unknown group of assailants targeted the home of Muhammad Ise Diriye, an official with the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).  The attack, carried out with hand grenades, left one of Diriye's bodyguards dead.  The ICRC official survived the attack as he was in Nairobi.
Five blasts occurred in the Pakhulani village in a district adjacent to Abkhazia and South Ossetia in Georgia on the night of October 5 through the morning of October 6. Three of the blasts exploded near local schools. No casualties were reported.It is unclear when the fourth explosion occurred.The police claimed they believe mortars were fired from Abkhazia but it is unclear who perpetrated the attack. Regions in Georgia bordering the restive separative provinces of Abkhazia and South Ossetia have witnessed increased attacks in 2008. Russia and Georgia fought a war which commenced in South Ossetia in August, 2008.
Amid large-scale anti-government protests in Bangkok, a car bomb exploded outside the Chart Thai party office, killing the driver and fatally wounding a bystander.  The victim was later identified as a former police officer and protest organizer.Thai officials have not identified the perpetrator of that attack.
Al-Shabaab launched another mortar attack against the presidential palace in Mogadishu.  Unlike many of their attacks, this attack resulted in the deaths of two individuals -- Gar'ade, the personal secretary of President Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmad, and Hasan Kafi, an officer of the presidential guard.  Their deaths came as three of the mortar rounds landed inside the palace.  Mortar attacks on the presidential palace are relatively common in Somalia.
On 8 October, Kurdish forces attack a bus carrying police officers. Five officers were killed and nineteen were wounded during the attack.The officers worked at the Ali Gaffar Okkan Police Career Academy. The shuttle bus was moving through the Azizye neighborhood, Diyarbakir province during the attack. The assailants reportedly used firearms and firebombs. The Freedom Hawks of Kurdistan claimed its Martyr Ozgur Roni Vengeance Brigade was responsible for the attack. Further, the Kurdish Workers Party also claimed responsibility.
Taliban insurgents destroyed two tankers carrying oil for military forces and killed the driver on the Kabul-Gardez Highway.  The attack sparked several hours of fighting along the highway between insurgent and Afghan forces.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
On October 9, 2008 a roadside bomb explosion struck a traffic police patrol near the Mudhaffar Square in the Shiite neighborhood of Sadr City (eastern Baghdad), killing a civilian and wounding two policemen and two bystanders.
Three police were wounded by a roadside bomb in the Chardiwal area, Andar District of Ghazni Province.  Local officials blamed the Taliban for the attack.  No credit was claimed.
Seven workers of the Afghan company, Gange, were killed when their vehicle struck a roadside mine in the Spera District of Khost Province.  The company deals with the protection of chromite stones to prevent smuggling.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
On October 12, 2008 a roadside bomb struck a police patrol in the Palestine Street in eastern Baghdad, wounding five policemen and two bystanders.  The police vehicle was severely damaged by the blast, which also caused damages to several nearby shops and civilian cars.
Five civilians were killed when their vehicle struck a roadside mine while returning from a wedding ceremony in the Zanakhan District of Ghazni Province.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
Nine civilians were killed and six were wounded when their mini-bus hit a roadside bomb in the Dihrawud District of Uruzgan Province. Local officials blamed the Taliban for the attack.
Taliban insurgents attacked the district headquarters of Charkh district, Logar Province, with light arms.  Police and NATO helicopters repelled the attack with no casualties.
On October 16, 2008 a bomb was diffused outside a police station in Santiago without incident.  A guard discovered the bomb, a pipe packed with explosives and a timer attached, in the parking lot of the station. Similar attacks have been perpetrated by anarchist groups in the past year in Santiago; there was no claim of attack.
Three civilians were killed and two wounded when their vehicle was struck by a roadside bomb on the Sharan-Kherkot Highway in Paktika Province.  Local officials blamed the Taliban for the attack.
On the evening of Oct 18, 2008 a bomb exploded on a football field in northeast Yangon (Rangoon).  The blast caused no injuries.  The Burmese junta typically blame pro-democracy activists and armed ethnics groups for bomb blasts.
Unknown gunmen murdered a teacher in the Harunkhel area of Ali Shir District, Khost Province.  No credit was claimed for the attack,
On 19 October at 9pm a bomb exploded inside the car of mayor Mehmet Yasar Turan's car. Turan is the mayor of the Cukurca District in Hakkari, and affiliated with the Turkish Justice and Development Party. No injuries were reported in the attack, although several nearby houses and business places were damaged.
On Oct 19, 2008 a rubber tapper in Yala province was killed in a drive-by shooting while returning from a local market.Police believe the attack is linked to the ongoing insurgency in southern Thailand that began in 2004
The Taliban murdered a British national working for the Christian charity, SERVE, in Kabul.  Gayle Williams was shot to death by two gunmen on a motorcycle as she walked to work.  The Taliban claimed Ms. Williams was killed for preaching the spread of Christianity in Afghanistan, a claim that was refuted by her colleagues.  Ms. Williams was previously based in Kandahar, but moved to Kabul out of security concerns.
On October 20, 2008 the restaurant of the Corsica Natura holiday camp was firebomb in the town of Linguizzetta, Corsica.  The bombing caused extensive damage at the German owned business but no casualties.There were no claims of responsibility for the attack; however, Corsican separatist have targeted 'foreign' mainly French interest in recent months.
Militants of the Hezb-e Eslami party fired rockets into the Wardak provincial capital of Maydanshahr.  Spokesman for the attack claimed the rockets were aimed at a US Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) operating in the area.  There were no casualties reported.
On October 23, 2008 a bomb exploded outside the Santander Bank branch in Santiago. The bomb a PVC pipe packed with black powder caused minimal damage and no casualties.The attack fits the profile of prior attacks committed by anarchist groups and groups linked to the Mapuche Indians.
On October 23, 2008 a total six small bombs exploded in downtown Bogota. The bombs all placed in trash cans injured a total of sixteen people and caused minor damage.A fourth bomb exploded near the Saltire Plaza Shopping Center.Police accuse the FARC for the attack; however, the blast occurred in the amidst of a national strike and may be related to this.
On October 24, 2008 a police diffused a 2kg bomb composed of dynamite outside the Athens headquarters of Royal Dutch Shell.  The police received an anonymous tip about the presence of the bomb and were able to diffuse it without any casualties.The assembly of the trigger mechanism was identical to past bombs constructed by the Revolutionary Struggle group.  This group was responsible for the 2007 attack on the US Embassy in Athens.
On October 25, 2008 a bomb exploded at the Euskotren train station in Amorebieta. The blast caused no casualties and but severely damaged to the station. ETA is believed to behind this attack along with another attack in the town of Berriz.
On October 26, 2008 gunmen attacked the house of Abdul Karim Hassan, a leader of an Awakening Council group that fights Al Qaida in Iraq in the Diyala province.  Three children associated with Hassan's group were killed by the attack; Hassan, three women and three more children from his group were wounded in the attack.  The report does not cite the location of this attack.
On October 27, 2008 FARC rebels attacked a boat carrying the mayor of Medio Atrato Municipality in Pune Corregimiento.  The attack left one dead and injured four others including the mayor's bodyguard. The mayor was uninjured in the attack. The FARC are believed to be responsible for tis attac.
On Oct 29, 2008 an improvised bomb was detonated by mobile phone at a market entrance.  Three soldiers, who were believed to be the primary targets of the blast, were seriously injured while six shoppers were also wounded.This incident is a part of the ongoing insurgency in southern Thailand that begun in 2004.
Unidentified assailants killed a former member of the Legitimate Defense Group in Zemmouri.  The fifty-four year old victim was working as a security guard when he was killed.  There were no further details on the weapon used, the name of the victim, or the identity of the attackers.
Around midnight of Oct 30, 2008, a bomb composed of TNT stuffed inside a PVC pipe was thrown into the Bangkok home of a Thai Constitutional Court judge.  No one was injured by the attack.
This is a series of bomb blasts that occurred within a span of minutes in the western state of Assam. Reports indicate that as many as ten bomb blasts took place. Total casualties include 77 people killed and 470 injured. The third bomb blast occurred in the capital of Guwahati, where explosions ripped through Pan Bazar, Fancy Bazar and Ganeshguri which was filled with shoppers and office goers. The blasts occurred after the Indian holiday Diwali and according to police, huge amounts of explosives like RDX or C4 were used.It was suspected that the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA), along with Harkat-ul-Jihad-al-Islami (HUJI) were behind the attacks
This is a series of bomb blasts that occurred within a span of minutes in the western state of Assam. Reports indicate that as many as ten bomb blasts took place. Total casualties include 77 people killed and 470 injured. A series of three explosions occurred in the town of Kokrajhar.   The blasts occurred after the Indian holiday Diwali and according to police, huge amounts of explosives like RDX or C4 were used.It was suspected that the United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA), along with Harkat-ul-Jihad-al-Islami (HUJI) were behind the attacks.
Two police were killed and three others wounded when their vehicle struck a roadside mine in the Qadam area of Ali Shir District of Khost Province.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
Insurgents with the Mujahideen Youth Movement (MYM) attempted to assassinate Hassan Bikulu, the Deputy Administrator of Baidoa.  Bikulu's car was completely destroyed in remote-detonated land mine attack, but he survived.  However, seven of his colleagues were killed.  The group later claimed credit for the assassination attempt.
On November 2, 2008 a roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol in the al-Kamaliyah neighborhood of southeastern Baghdad, killing one policeman and woundeing three civilians.
Dany Egreteau, a French aid worker working for the group Amitie-Franco-Afghane (French-Afghan Friendship) was abducted on a street in central Kabul by unknown gunmen dressed as security guards.  The gunmen shot dead one man who tried to intervene. Reports indicate the dead man was a driver for the Afghan National Intelligence service.  A colleague walking with Mr Egreteau escaped kidnapping.  Colleagues of Mr. Egreteau stated that his organization specialized in education programs.
On Nov 3, 2008 MILF (Moro Islamic Liberation Front) insurgents attacked the village of Momoh in Sarangani province.  The rebels fought with civilian village watchmen for 10 minutes before troops arrived to drive off attackers.  No villagers were hurt  by the attackVillage Chairman Tabalao believes that he was the target of the attack, as MILF has threatened him and accused him of cooperating with the government.  A local army commander believes that the attack is to intimidate the local population and prevent them from cooperating with the government.  MILF (Moro Islamic Liberation Front) is an organization fighting an on-going insurgency against government forces in southern Philippines.
On November 3, 2008 two roadside bombs exploded in succession near the police headquarters in the Tahariyat Square in Karrada district.  Six people were killed and twenty others injured.  Ten policemen were among the twenty injured.
On Nov. 4, 2008 a resident of Yala province's Tambon Kabang was shot dead by gunmen while driving his truck.  The gunmen then set fire to the vehicle before fleeing.Police attribute this attack to Muslim insurgents who have been conducting violent attacks in southern Thailand since 2004.
Three police were killed and two others wounded when their vehicle was destroyed by a remote-controlled mine in the Zahid Abad area of Logar Province.  The police were charged with the protection of the Aynak Copper Mine.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
On 5 November Hamas claimed it fired seven Qassam rockets at Kibbutz Nir Yitzhaq, Mivtahim, and a military post in Sufa at 0500 GMT. No human or material losses were reported.  The group claimed the attack was carried out in retaliation for the Zionist enemy's violation of the calm, which resulted in the martyrdom of six al-Qassam mujahidin.
On 5 November Hamas claimed it fired nine Qassam rockets at Kibbutz Yad Mordekhay, Mefasim, Kibbutz Ziqim, and Kibbutz Erez between 0430-0515 GMT. No human or material losses were reported.  The group claimed the attack was carried out in retaliation for the Zionist enemy's violation of the calm, which resulted in the martyrdom of six al-Qassam mujahidin.
On the evening of 5 November, the Martyr Abu Ali Mustafa Brigades of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine claimed it launched two upgraded Sumud rockets at Sederot and the western Negev. No human or material losses were reported.
On Nov 5, 2008 a teenage boy was gunned down in Yala province's Yaha district as he partook in a bathing ritual for prayer.Police attribute this attack to Muslim insurgents who have fought government forces since 2004.
Militants with al-Shabaab shelled the Presidential Palace in Mogadishu and later claimed credit for the attack.  The Presidential Palace has been the target of similar attacks in the past.
On 7 November, the Hezbollah Brigades in Palestine claimed launching a Radwan rocket at Sederot. No human or material losses were reported after the attack.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed Mahmud Muhammad Usman, a Somali aid worker in Jamame, a village in Lower Shabeelle.  This attack comes amidst a string of attacks against aid workers in the country.
Unidentified gunmen kidnapped Muhammad Ma'alin Osman, an education official in the Hiraan Region.   Osman was touring villages in Raangaabo when he was abducted by gunmen.  It was not immediately clear who was responsible for the attack, but no ransom was immediately demanded.
On November 9, 2008 a roadside bomb exploded near a police patrol around the al-Rubaie intersection of the Zayouna neighborhood, wounding two policemen and four bystanders.
On 10 November the Fatah-affiliated al-Aqsa Brigades claimed it launched a homemade projectile at Kibbutz Keffar Azza, just east of Gaza City. The group claimed the attack, which led to no human or material losses, came in retaliation for Israeli aggressions and to affirm our choice of resistance.
On November 10, 2008 two coordinated bombings occurred in the morning.   The first bombing was a car bomb explosion followed by a suicide bomb explosion where the suicide bomber detonated his explosive vest shortly after a crowd gathered over the first explosion in a marketplace in Adhamiyah.  The explosions caused twenty-two fatalities and forty-three injuries.
On 11 November, Turkish authorities foiled a plot to detonate explosives at the commemoration of Mustafa Kemal Ataturk in the southeastern province of Hakkari. Plastic explosives had been installed under a desk that was to be used in the ceremony. The four assailants possessed a mobile phone that could trigger the explosives.
On Nov 11, 2008 a bomb exploded inside the Government House in Bangkok, Thailand while PAD (People's Alliance for Democracy) leaders addressed demonstrators.  The blast injured 2 protectors. Senior military officer theorized the the bomb may have been a M29 or M79 grenade launched from outside the building, while the metropolitan police believe that the bomb not a grenade and came from inside the compound.The attack is part of a series of violent incidents occurring around a period of political unrest in Bangkok.
On November 11, 2008 a roadside bomb exploded in the crowded Tahrir Square in the Bab al-Sharji area of central Mosul, wounding five people and damaging several nearby cars and shops.
A suicide bomber killed two police, three civilians and wounded several civilians in the same area.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack but stated that they attacked British military forces.
On November 12, 2008 two coordinated attacks occurred in quick succession.  The first attack involved a car bomb explosion near a police patrol in the Shiite neighborhood of Baghdad al-Jadida.  Minutes later, a second attack which involved a roadside bomb exploded as security forces and civilians gathered to examine the first attack.  A policeman and four others were injured by these attacks, which also damaged a police vehicle.
One teenage female student was blinded and five others wounded when assailants on a motorbike sprayed acid in their faces as they walked to school in Kandahar Province.  On November 25, police arrested 10 Taliban militants in connection to the attack.  Kandahar officials claimed that senior Taliban commanders paid the arrested militants 2,000$ to carry out the attack.
On 13 November the Fatah-affiliated al-Mujahidin brigades claimed it launched four Hafs rockets at Sederot. No human or material losses were reported.
On November 14, 2008 a bomb exploded outside of the European Union envoy's house in Pristina. The blast caused no casualties but severely damaged the building.   The authorities believe the bombing was motivated by the EU role in the impending deceleration of independence by the Kosovar Government.
On 14 November, the Ayman Jidah units of the al-Aqsa Brigades, which are affiliated with the Fatah movement, claimed it launched several rockets at Sederot. No human or material losses were reported.
On November 15, 2008 a car bomb explosion at the National Theater in the Karrada neighborhood of central Baghdad killed three people and wounded twenty-three others.
On 16 November the al-Nasir Salah al-DIn Brigades claimed it launched a Nasir-3 rocket at Sederot. The group claimed the attack was in retaliation for the occupation's crimes and the martyrdom of four of the brigade's men this morning.In a separate Israeli report, it was noted that rockets falling in Sederot led one person to be wounded with shrapnel wounds, and several others  treated for shock. It was unclear which rockets caused these injuries.
On 16 November the Martyr Abu Ali Mustafa Brigades of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, and the al-Quds Brigades of Islamic Jihad claimed launching two rockets at Sederot in a joint statement. In a separate Israeli report, it was noted that rockets falling in Sederot led one person to be wounded with shrapnel wounds, and several others  treated for shock. It was unclear which rockets caused these injuries.
Al-Shabaab claimed credit for an attack on an allegedly Ethiopian-friendly politician in Mogadishu.  They launched shoulder-mounted rockets at the house and used small arms as well.  The attack ultimately left five of the politician's guards dead and destroyed the home.
On November 17, 2008 unidentified gunmen shot dead an Awakening Council group member in a village near the town of Iskandariyah.
On 18 November the Abu Ali Mustafa Brigades of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine claimed it launched an advanced Sumud rocket at Sederot. No injuries or damages were reported.
Unknown militants destroyed a middle school in Ismailkhel District of Khost Province.  Reports indicate the building was destroyed by four bombs.  No one was injured in the attack.  The school had been constructed with the aid of a Provisional Reconstruction Team (PRT).  No credit was claimed for the bombing.
On the evening of 19 November the National Resistance Brigades of the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine claimed it launched a projectile towards Ashqelon. No human or material losses were reported.
A suicide bomber was talked down from detonating his belt full of explosives in Constantine's Palace of Justice in Constantine.  The failed attack resulted in the arrest of the suicide bomber, who was immediately taken into police custody through a side door.  The building was very crowded, and eyewitnesses claimed they saw five explosives in the belt.
On November 21, 2008 a bomb exploded at a TV relay station on Arnotegi Hill in Bilbao. The blast caused extensive damage to the station but caused no casualties.Authorities believe that ETA is responsible for the attack.
On 21 November the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-affiliated Martyr Abu Ali Mustafa Brigades claimed it fired two advanced Sumud rockets at Sederot. No human or material losses were reported.
Three police were killed and three others wounded when their vehicle struck a roadside mine on the Ghazni-Sharan highway in Andar District of Ghazni Province.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
On 22 November the military wing of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine claimed it attacked the Israeli city of Ashqelon with two projectiles. No human or material losses were reported.
A series of four bombs exploded within a span of minutes in the city of Lahore. Two bombs exploded one after the other at the site of a cultural site near Khadifi stadium. All of the bombs were of low-intensity. No one was injured in the blasts. Pakistan has been battling an Islamist insurgency since 2007 when it joined the U.S.-led war on terror in 2001.
On November 23, 2008 a bomb exploded near a shop selling liquor in Uqba bin Nafie Square in Baghdad's central district of Karrada.  The explosion set the shop on fire and caused damages to several nearby shops and civilian cars.Liquor stores in Baghdad are frequently attacked in Iraq as Islamic law prohibits dealings with alcohol.
Two civilians were killed and two others wounded when a remote-controlled bomb destroyed a bridge in the Kareez Mir area of Kabul.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
On November 24, 2008 a roadside bomb struck a bus carrying Trade Ministry employees, killing eleven ministry employees and wounding five others in the Shiite-dominated district of Baghdad al-Jadida.  The explosion destroyed the bus and also caused damages to several nearby shops and civilian cars.  It is believed that this attack along with a suicide bombing explosion at the entrance of a Green Zone was executed to put pressure on the Iraqi government to sign a SOFA agreement with the U.S.
Five police were killed when gunmen attacked a police checkpoint in the Loy Bagh area of Helmand Province.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
On Nov 26, 2008 an improvised explosive device planted in a Christian church in Kabacan, a town in the province of North Cotabato, exploded.The explosion caused no casualties.Authorities blame the attack on the MILF (Moro Islamic Liberation Front), an organization fighting an on-going insurgency against government forces in southern Philippines.
A series of coordinated attacks struck various locations around Mumbai. The attacks began on November 26, 2008 and ended on November 29, 2008. In total, 173 people were killed with 308 people injured. The attacks were blamed on Lashkar-e-Taiba. One of the first attacks occurred in the popular Leopold Cafe where militants opened fire in the restaurant, killing 10 people.
A series of coordinated attacks struck various locations around Mumbai. The attacks began on November 26, 2008 and ended on November 29, 2008. In total, 173 people were killed with 308 people injured. The attacks were blamed on Lashkar-e-Taiba. One of the attacks occurred in the Oberoi Hotel. Militants entered the hotel on November 26, taking a number of hostages. Police were manage to secure the building on November 28 after a prolonged firefight with the militants. Most of the hostages, which included foreign nationals, were rescued by police. Two of the terrorists were shot dead.
Insurgents threw two grenades at a police vehicle in Baidoa, killing four people and wounding twenty others. Attacks on police forces are common in Somalia.
On November 27, 2008 a bomb planted in the car of a police commando officer killed him when it exploded while he was on his way to work in Baghdad's southern neighborhood of Saydiyah,
On Nov 28, 2008 attacked fired M79 grenades at the main office of ASTV (Asia Satellite Television) in Bangkok, Thailand.  They attackers were trying to blow the satellite transponder dish apart and engaged the ASTV security guard in a brief firefight before fleeing.  No one was injured by the attack.
Armed gunmen kidnapped three people and burned a 5,000 liter oil tanker on the road between Tagab and Nejrab Districts of Kapisa Province.  The kidnapped individuals included Mohammad Yagub, and official of the Kapisa health directorate, along with one contractor and the driver of the tanker.  The Taliban claimed credit for the incident and released the contractor and driver the next day.
On 29 November a Qassam rocket was fired by Palestinian militants from the northern Gaza strip towards the Kamiyya area. No human or material losses were reported, and the attack was not claimed.
On November 29, 2008 an attacker threw a bomb into a crowd of demonstrating vendors in Bangkok, Thailand.  Seventeen were injured in the blast.Police suspect that the attacker had sneaked behind the stage of the protesters, threw the bomb and fled.The attack is a part of a series of violent incidents during a period of political instability in Thailand.
Al-Shabaab claimed credit for a remote-detonated landmine attack that killed four members of the security detail of Ahmed Daci, the district head of Wadajir in Mogadishu.  His home was attacked earlier in the month by Islamist insurgents in an attack that went unclaimed.
On 30 November a mortar shell landed in the western Negev. It had been fired from the Gaza strip.No injuries or damages were reported, and the attack was not claimed.
On Dec 1, 2008 about 20 minutes after a grenade attack against anti-government protesters, assailants on a boat attacked an ASTV station with gunfire and explosives in Bangkok, Thailand.  Security guards fired back.  No one was injured in the exchange.This attack is part of a series of violent incident during a period of political instability in Thailand in late 2008.
On December 1, 2008 a roadside bomb exploded at the convoy of Mudhir al-Mawla, an advisor in the Iraqi cabinet, near his house in the al-Suleikh neighborhood of northern Baghdad.  al-Mawla along with 10 others were injured, but his driver and two bystander were killed by the attack.
On 1 December a Qassam rocket exploded near a kibbutz located south of Ashqelon. No human or material losses were reported, and the attack was not claimed.
Three people were killed and thirty wounded when a bomb exploded on a passenger train. The train had reached the Diphu station in the Karbi Anglong district when the explosion occurred.Police speculate that the blast was triggered by a Programmed Time Delay device (PTD). While no one claimed responsibility, police blamed the Karbi Longri N.C. Hills Liberation Front (KLNLF) for the attack.
A gas cylinder exploded at a cafe in Almaty, the former capital of Kazakhstan, around 1 pm on December 3, 2008. One person was killed and over 10 were injured as a result of the explosion and fire. The attack was unclaimed.
Insurgents with al-shabaab attacked an immigration office near Mogadishu's airport.  The attack left four guards dead and resulted in extensive damage to the building.
On 4 December a mortar shell landed in an open area of the Negev. No human or material losses were reported.
On December 4, 2008 two simultaneous suicide bombings using two 'booby-trapped' cars targeted the concrete barriers outside two different police centers in Fallujah, killing at least fifteen and wounding more than 100.  The first police center attack occurred in the Al-Julan neighborhood; the second in al-Shurtah neighborhood. An Al Qaeda front group, the Islamic State of Iraq, has reportedly claimed responsibility for the attack.
A large car bomb blast occurred in the city of Peshawar, ripping through a crowded marketplace, as crowds of people were out ahead of the Muslim festival of Eid. According to witnesses, the explosion ripped open a natural gas pipeline, which created a fire that spread to nearby shops and buildings. According to police, 20 to 25 kilograms of explosives were used in the blast, but it was not the work of a suicide bomber. It is unclear who was behind the attack. 27 people were killed in the blast and 90 were wounded.
On 6 December the Fatah-affiliated al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades Jaysh al-Buraq claimed it launched two Buraq rockets towards Sederot. No Human or material losses were reported. The group claimed the attack was in retaliation for the continuation of the Israeli attacks in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
On 6 December a concussion bomb exploded in front of the Vakfibank branch in Istanbul's Fatih district. Only two nearby pedestrians were lightly wounded in the attack. No group claimed responsibility for the attack.
The FARC remotely detonated an explosive device on a vehicle carrying five members of the Colombian Welfare Institute (ICBF). The blast occurred on a rural road near Campo Hermoso in the San Vicente del Caguan Municipality. The explosion killed two of the ICBF staff and wounded three others. Authorities believe that the FARC intended to target a vehicle carrying local government officials.
On 7 December the al-Nasir Salah al-Din Brigades of the Popular Resistance Committees claimed it fired a Nasir-2 rocket at an Israeli monument east of Bayt Hanun. No human or material losses were reported.
FARC rebels blew up a bridge connecting San Jose del Guaviare and El Retorno. El Retorno was isolated from the national road system as result of the blast.
On 9 December the Martyr Abu Ali Mustafa Brigades of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, as well as the Fatah-affiliated al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades-Martyr Nabil Mas'ud units claimed joint responsibility for firing a rocket toward Ashqelon. No human or material losses were reported.
A remote-detonated, roadside bomb targeted two Medcins Sans Frontiers (MSF) vehicles in Gaalkacyo.  The attack destroyed both vehicles, but there were no MSF officials in the car at the time.  It wounded guards and people nearby the scene.
At least 20 people - many of them Afghan refugees - were wounded when a bomb detonated in a refugee camp in Kohat. According to police, it is unclear whether the bomb was planted by militants or if it was an old one. No one claimed responsibility for the attack.
On 13 December the office of Saudi Airlines was set on fire with molotov cocktails. A group referring to itself as Ekhvan al-Redvan claimed responsibility for the attack. The group argued it carried out the attack due to the fact that Saudi Arabia had reconciled with Israel.
Three police were killed and five police and six civilians were wounded when a remote-controlled bomb destroyed a police vehicle in front of the Mirwais Hospital in Kandahar City.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
Sahar Gol, a prosecutor in Ghazni Province, was kidnapped while traveling to his home in the Baqawal village of Ghazni.  No credit was claimed for the kidnapping.
On December 15, 2008 a woman suicide bomber wearing an explosive-belt knocked at the front door of the house of Ahmad Khamis, a leader of the Awakening Council group in the town of Tarmiyah, and blew herself up, killing him.  Khamis' son was wounded by the blast that also caused damages to the house.Such suicide attacks carried out by Al Qaida in Iraq are common.
Gunmen attacked workers of a road construction company in the Alisher District of Khost Province, killing one worker and wounding five others.  The company was building a police checkpoint at the time of the attack.  Local officials blamed the Taliban for the attack.
On December 16, 2008 a roadside bomb detonated near the convoy of Raid Fahmi, Iraqi Minister of Sciences and Technology, while traveling near the gate of Babel Hotel in the Jadriya neighborhood in central Baghdad.  It is not know whether Fahmi was in the convoy during the attack which wounded one of his bodygaurds and two bystanders.
On 17 December the Islamic Jihad-affiliated al-Quds Brigades claimed it launched two projectiles at Ashqelon. No human or material losses were reported.
Heavily armed separatists gunned down the deputy village chief of Narathiwats Rusoh district in his home on Dec 16, 2008.Narathiwat is a province in southern Thailand, where an on-going separatist insurgency has been occurring since 2004.
A bomb exploded at a building occupied by Atlantica radio broadcasting. The station is owned by Guido Guardia a Senator and member of the opposition party.  The blast caused no casualties but damaged nearby buildings.A note signed Gerald was left at the scene, telling the Senator to leave Santa Cruz and go to La Paz or he and his family would be killed.  The Senator accused two government officials of being behind the attacks. This is the third time the Guardia and his family have been targeted.
On 18 December the al-Quds Brigades of Islamic Jihad claimed it fired a Quds rocket at Sederot. No human or material losses were reported.
(One of two attacks) On December 18, 2008, unidentified assailants detonated a homemade bomb outside a department store in the southern Philippines' city of Iligan. A second exploded five minutes later outside another department store in the city. The two bombings killed three people and injured 53 others. The bombs were made from motar shells and were detonated using a cellular phone. They were wrapped like Christmas gifts. No one claimed responsibility for the bombings, but the police suspect that the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) is to blame. A Philippines military brigade commander said that the use of mortar rounds in constructing the bombs was characteristic of MILF explosives. The MILF seek a Muslim homeland on the southern Philippines' island of Mindanao. The MILF denied responsibility and blamed the government for carrying out the attack. The MILF blamed the Philippines government for carrying out the attack.
Major Abdol Ghafur, the security commander of Qarabagh District of Ghazni Province, was wounded along with his driver when militants attacked his vehicle in the Jagharo area of Qarabagh District.  Local officials blamed the Taliban for the attack.
On 20 December the al-Quds Brigades of Islamic Jihad claimed it fired a Quds rocket at Sederot. No human or material losses were reported.
On Dec 20, 2008 a 15 kg improvised explosive device hidden in a pickup truck outside of the Park View Hotel in downtown Yala exploded.  The attack injured four people.  Police say that the bomb failed to explode completely because of a circuit failure.This attack is part of an on-going insurgency in Thailands southern Muslim provinces that began in 2004.
On 21 December the al-Quds Brigades of Islamic Jihad claimed it fired five Quds missiles at Israeli targets near Gaza. On the same day it was reported that a Thai man was injured in Israel due to rockets falling on Sederot, although it is unclear which rocket caused the injury.
On 21 December Islamic Jihad claimed it fired four rockets at the city of Ashqelon. No human or material losses were reported.
On 21 December the al-Aqsa Brigades of Fatah claimed firing rockets towards Sederot. No human or material losses were reported.
On December 19, 2008, an improvised explosive device (IED) was discovered in the southern Philippines' city of Iligan. The IED had been placed in a papaya. No one claimed responsibility for planting the bomb, but the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) may be to blame. The MILF seeks a Muslim homeland in the southern Philippines; it has increased its attacks since a peace accord which would have created such a homeland was blocked by the Philippines' supreme court at the beginning of August. The MILF is suspected of carrying out the bombings of two department stores in Iligan on December 18. Note: One IED was found in a papaya on December 21 in a vacant lot in Iligan. Another one was found on a passenger bus elsewhere in the western part of Mindanao island on December 23.
Unidentified insurgents shelled the Presidential Palace in Mogadishu.  The attack did not result in any casualties and was met with a retaliatory attack on Bakaaraha Market.
On 23 December Hamas launched around 17 mortars towards Israeli towns. Israeli reporting indicated that a number of the mortars fell in the Negev area. No human or material losses were reported.
On December 23, 2008, police discovered an improvised explosive device (IED) on a passenger bus in the southern Philippines' city of Pagadian (Mindanao island). The bomb was made from two 60 millimeter mortar shells. This foiled bombing attempt was the third on the western part of Mindanao since the December 18 bombings of two department stores in Iligan City. There is a strong chance that the bomb was planted by the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF). The MILF seeks a Muslim homeland in the southern Philippines; it has increased its attacks since a peace accord which would have created such a homeland was blocked by the Philippines' supreme court at the beginning of August. The MILF is also suspected of being responsible for the December 18 bombings.
On 24 December the Fatah-affiliated al-Aqsa Brigades claimed it launched a projectile at Sederot. No human or material losses were reported.
On 24 December Hamas claimed it launched four Qassam rockets and one Grad missile at Netivot. No human or material losses were reported.
A bomb exploded on the railway track between two railway stations early in the morning in Assam after the New Delhi-Dibrugarh Rajdhani Express had crossed the area. No casualties were reported. No one claimed responsibility for the attack.
On December 25, 2008 a bomb exploded outside a real estate office in Anglet a town in French Basque Country.  Real estate agents have been a target of underground separatist movements in the past.No one claimed credit for the attack; however, the The Basque Country is not for sale was written on a wall of the bombed building.
On 25 December the Abu Ali Mustafa Brigades of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine claimed it fired four Sumud rockets at Sederot. No human or material losses were reported.
On 25 December the al-Nasir Salah al-Din Brigades of the Popular Resistance Committees claimed it fired two Nasir-3 rockets at Sederot. No human or material losses were reported.
On December 25, 2008, unidentified assailants threw a grenade at a canal in Basilan province in the southern Philippines. No one was injured or killed in the attack and no one has claimed responsibility. The chief of the Philippines Armed Forces Western Mindanao Command said that his ground commanders prevented the attack from being more destructive. There is a chance that members of the Abu Sayyaf Group are behind the attack, as the group is suspected of carrying out another grenade attack in Basilan on December 23. The militant Abu Sayyaf Group seeks an independent Islamic state on the islands of Mindanao and Sulu in the southern Philippines.
Three police were killed when their vehicle struck a roadside bomb in the Nawad District of Helmand Province.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
On 27 December the Hamas-affiliated Izz al-Din al-Qassam Brigades claimed responsibility for initially firing four Qassam rockets, and later three Grad missiles, at Ashqelon. No human or material losses were reported.
On 27 December the Hamas-affiliated Izz al-Din al-Qassam Brigades launched two rockets at Sederot. No human or material losses were reported.
On 27 December the Abu Ali Mustafa Brigades of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine claimed it launched five mortars at Karab Abu Salim. No human or material losses were reported.
On 27 December the al-Quds Brigades of Islamic Jihad claimed it launched five rockets at Ashqelon. No human or material losses were reported.
On 27 December, the Izz al-Din al-Qassam Brigades of Hamas claimed launching two Grad rockets at Azata. No human or material losses were reported.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed the Assistant Minister for Reconciliation in Baydhabo.  Isma'il Hasan Timir was killed by three gunmen armed with pistols.  The killing was condemned by Shaykh Adan Muhammad Nur, the Speaker of the Somali Parliament.  Assassinations of prominent government officials are common in Somalia.
On 28 December Fatah claimed launching a projectile at Ashqelon. No human or material losses were reported.
36 people were killed and 16 wounded in a suspected car bomb attack near a polling station at a government school in Buner. The attack, an apparent suicide mission, was an attempt to disrupt elections for a National Assembly Seat. The militant group, Tehrik-i-Taliban Swat, claimed responsibility for the car bomb, saying it was to avenge the killing of its members in the area a few months prior.
Two civilians were killed and at least 17 others wounded when a suicide-car bomb exploded in front of the Parwan Province Government building in the capital of Charikar.  Dissident warlord, Gulbuddin Hekmatyar claimed credit for the attack.
On 29 December the Izz al-Din al-Qassam Brigades claimed it launched three Grad rockets at Ashdod. Four Israelis were injured due to the attacks.
On 29 December the Izz al-Din al-Qassam Brigades claimed it launched twelve Qassam rockets at Sederot. No human or material losses were immediately reported.
On 29 December the Izz al-Din al-Qassam Brigades claimed it launched one Qassam rocket at Kerem Shalom. No human or material losses were immediately reported.
On 29 December, the Hamas-affiliated Izz al-Din al-Qassam Brigades launched three russian-made grad missiles into Ashqelon. The rockets struck a construction site, killing one and wounding eight others.
On 29 December the al-Quds brigades of Islamic Jihad claimed it launched a Quds rocket at Keffar Azza. No human or material losses were immediately reported.
On 30 December the Hamas-affiliated Izz al-Din al-Qassam Brigades claimed it fired a Grad missile at Be'er Sheva. The rocket fell short, however, landing in Kiryat Mala'khi, roughly six kilometers from the intended target. Israeli reporting indicated that several rockets were fired towards Be'er Sheva, and that one caused some damage to a building in the area.
On 30 December the Eagles of Palestine Brigades claimed it launched two rockets at Ashqelon. No human or material losses were reported.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a woman who allegedly a relationship with the Ethiopian army in Baydhabo.  The relationship was described as close.  According to the media report, this was the fourth woman killed in this same district from allegedly having a relationship with the Ethiopians.
On 31 December, the Hamas-affiliated Izz al-Din al-Qassam Brigades claimed it launched approximately four Qassam rockets at Be'eri. The rockets were launched in two phases. No human or material losses were reported.
On 31 December, the Hamas-affiliated Izz al-Din al-Qassam Brigades claimed it launched a total of five Grad rockets at Be'er Sheva. The rockets were launched in three phases. One of the rockets struck a schoolhouse in the area, causing a great amount of damage. No human losses were reported.
On 31 December, the Hamas-affiliated Izz al-Din al-Qassam Brigades claimed it launched a total of four Grad rockets at Ofaqim. The rockets were launched in two phases. No human or material losses were reported.
On 31 December, the Hamas-affiliated Izz al-Din al-Qassam Brigades claimed it launched approximately three Qassam rockets at Sederot.No human or material losses were reported.
On 31 December, the Hamas-affiliated Izz al-Din al-Qassam Brigades claimed it launched Qassam rockets at Nir Yitzhaq.No human or material losses were reported.
On Dec 31, 2008 insurgents used a mobile phone to detonate an improvised explosive device outside of a auto repair shop in Yala, a province in southern Thailand.  The insurgents waited for soldiers on patrol to approach the site before setting off the explosive.  Two soldiers and a civilian were injured by the blast.  This attack is part of an on-going insurgency in Thailands southern Muslim provinces that began in 2004.
On December 31, 2008 Mowaffaq al-Hamdani, a Sunni Arab candidate for upcoming provincial elections in Nineveh was killed by unidentified gunmen on a major street in Mosul.  One policeman died in a gunfight with the attackers as they escaped.
On 1 January Hamas launched two Qassam missiles at the Magen Kibbutz. No human or material losses were reported.
On 1 January Hamas launched a Grad rocket at Hatzerim. No human or material losses were reported.
On 1 January, the National Resistance Brigades of the Democratic Front for the Liberation Front for the Liberation of Palestine claimed it fired eight upgraded Muqawamah rockets and four mortars at a number of targets, including the Nahal Oz post, Kibbutz Sa'ad, Ashqelon, Sederot, as well as Israeli military vehicles. It is unclear how many rockets struck each individual target, and no human or material losses were reported. The group claimed in a statement that the attacks were in response to the continued aggression and bombing of Gaza strip.
On 2 January Israeli reporting claimed of the seven rockets that struck Ashqelon, one damaged a house, while another struck a car in the city. Additionally, a total of seven Israelis also were wounded by rockets launched into the city.It is unclear which group's launched into Ashqelon that day caused the damage and injuries.
On 2 January Israeli reporting claimed one of two rockets launched into the Eshqol regional council on 2 January caused light damage to a factory. The second rocket exploded in an open field. It is unclear which of the rockets launched into Israeli on 2 January caused the damage.
On 2 January Hamas launched four Qassam rockets at the Israeli settlements of Sederot and Ziqim. It was unclear how many of the four rockets struck each city.  No human or material losses were reported.
On 3 January Hamas claimed responsibility for launching two Grad rockets at Netivot. No human or material losses were reported.
On 3 January the Izz al-Din al-Qassam brigades of Hamas claimed they launched a Qassam rocket at Ashqelon. No human or material losses were reported.
On 3 January the Izz al-Din al-Qassam brigades of Hamas claimed they launched a Qassam rocket at Netivot. No human or material losses were reported.
Unknown militants set fire to a medical clinic in the Arghandab District of Kandahar Province. No credit was claimed for the attack.
Unidentified gunmen shot and killed a member of the World Food Program (WFP) in Gedo Region.  The head of the WFP in Garabahaarey District, Ibrahim Husayn Du'ale, was killed as he was working during the day.  Killings of WFP employees are increasingly common in Somalia.
Two American Soldiers and three Afghan civilians were killed and 21 civilians wounded when a suicide bomber detonated his explosives in a crowded bazaar in the Maiwand District of Kandahar Province.  The target of the attack was not know.  The Taliban claimed credit for the bombing.
Haji Gol, the chairman of the local council for Dand District, Kandahar Province, was murdered by two unknown gunmen on a motorcycle as he returned to his home after evening prayers.  Mr. Gol was of the Papalzai tribe and had close and friendly relations  with the family of Afghan President Hamid Karzai, particularly the President's brother, Ahmad Wali Karzai.  The Taliban denied responsibility for the murder.
A suicide car-bomb exploded in Kabul between the German Embassy and a US military base, Camp Eggers, killing five people, including one US soldier and wounding at least 26 others, including 6 US soldiers and one American contractor.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack and stated that the suicide bomber, identified as Shamsul Rahman, attacked two vehicles belonging to the German Embassy and carrying German diplomats.
One police was wounded when a police vehicle struck a roadside mine in Khost City.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
Nine people were wounded, including five children, when a suicide bomber attacked a wedding party in the Shahr-e Jaded District of Baghlan Province. The attack wounded Mohammad Afzal, the security commander for the district.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
One civilian was killed and nine others wounded when a suicide bomber exploded his bomb in Shahe-e Naw City, Samkani District, Paktia Province.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack and stated that the target with an intelligence officer, identified as Karamkhel.  Reports did not indicate if this individual was a casualty.
Four civilians were killed and at least nine others wounded when their mini-bus struck a roadside bomb in the Zheray District of Kandahar Province.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
On January 31, 2009 a 136kg car bomb was found near a school in Castlewellan.  The bomb was diffused without incident after the police received a tip about its presence.  Authorities believe the intended target was a nearby military barracks. Dissident republican groups are believed to behind the attack.
Two civilians were wounded when militants detonated a remote-controlled bomb in Kandahar City.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
A suicide bomber blew himself up among worshipers that were heading towards a Shiite Muslim mosque in Dera Ghazi Khan, in central Pakistan. The blast killed 24 people and injured 40.
The security commander of Qarghayi District, Abdol Aziz. was killed along with one other policeman when unknown gunmen attacked a police checkpoint near the Dubai Hotel in the Kas Aziz Khan area of Qarghayi District, Laghman Province.  A government spokesman stated that the attack was carried out from the Tor Mountains. No responsibility was claimed for the attack.
Two American nationals, their Afghan interpreter and one policeman were killed when police tried to defuse a remote-controlled mine in the Nad-e Ali District of Helmand Province.  The security commander of the region, Maj. Mohammad Nader,  was also seriously wounded in the explosion. Reports identified the Americans killed only as advisors.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
On February 9, 2009 a car bomb exploded in the Campos de las Naciones district of Madrid. The blast caused no casualties but did result in significant damage to nearby building and cars. The attack comes three weeks before regional elections in Basque Country.ETA is believed to be responsible for the attack. Similar to previous ETA attacks authorities were warned about the bombs presence.
Multiple suicide bombers targeted Afghan government building of the Ministry of Justice and Education in central Kabul.  The total casualty count was reported at 19 dead and 54 wounded.  The first attack targeted a Justice Department detention center in the Khair Khana area of Kabul.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack and claimed it was in response to mistreatment of Taliban prisoners by the Afghan government.
One police was killed and eight others were wounded when a suicide-bomber detonated his explosives as he was being searched by police at a checkpoint in Sharan, capital of Paktika Province.  The Taliban claimed credit for the bombing.
On February 12, 2009 a series of arson attacks were carried out in Athens.  Each of the attacks caused minor damage but no casualties resulted.One device was planted outside the home of a prosecutor in charge of the terrorism portfolio. Authorities believe the Revolutionary Struggle is behind the attack.  This group an amalgamation of anarchist groups has targeted the police and government in the past with similar attacks.
Badiuzzaman Sabri, the district chief of Nader Shah Kot District of Khost Province, was killed along with two of his bodyguards when their vehicle struck a roadside mine.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
Five civilians were killed when their vehicle struck a roadside bomb on the Kandahar-Tarinkot highway in the Nish District of Kandahar Province.  Local officials blamed the Taliban for the attack.
On February 18, 2009 a 60kg car bomb was diffused outside the Greek headquarters of Citibank without incident.  The bomb was comprised of gas cylinders with a clock timer.The bomb's characteristics were similar to those of the bomb used in the Oklahoma City attack. The Revolutionary Struggle is believed to be behind the attack.
Sarfaraz Khan, the chairman of the tribal council for the Greshk district of Helmand Province, was murdered by gunmen on a motorcycle as he left his office.  No credit was claimed for the killing.
On February 25, 2009 a house in the town of Anglet located in the French Basque Country was firebombed.  The bomb caused no casualties and minor damage to the house. The French Basque separatist group Irrintzi claimed responsibility for the attack during a call warning of the bombs presence.
Four security guards of a road construction company were killed when their vehicle struck a roadside mine in the Yusofkhel District of Paktika Province.  Local officials blamed the Taliban for the attack.
Approximately 25 rockets were fired into a residential area in Sabari District of Khost Province. No casualties were reported.  Local officials blamed the Taliban for the attack.
Two engineers and one security guard of an Afghan road construction company were killed when their vehicle was destroyed by a mine in the Siyuri District of Zabol Province.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
On March 9, 2009 a bomb exploded outside a Citibank branch in Athens. The bomb composed of 1kg of dynamite caused minor damage to the branch and nearby vehicles but no casualties. This is the second attack against Citibank in recent days.The Revolutionary Struggle claimed responsibility for the attack.
One police was killed and two other wounded when militants attacked a police checkpoint in the Greshk District of Helmand Province.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
On March 11, 2009 a bomb exploded at a water treatment plant near the town of Villavicencio. The blast caused serious damage to the pipeline and wounded two police officers; the blast also left the majority of the residence of Villavicencio without water.  The bomb was comprised of ammonium nitrate fuel oil.The FARC is believed to be responsible for the attack.
A police vehicle was damaged by a roadside mine in the Imam Sahib District of Kunduz Province.  No casualties were reported.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack and claimed seven police killed.
Two civilians were killed and seven others wounded when a suicide-bomber detonated his explosive-laden vehicle outside of a school in the Kampany area of Kabul City.  The school was identified as the Qala Kashaf School in Kabul.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
Four policemen were killed when militants attacked a police patrol in the Panjwai District of Kandahar Province.  The police were engaged in operations to check bridges for explosives when the militants ambushed the patrol.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
On March 19, 2009 a bomb exploded outside the Public Estate Corporation and the General Athens Police Directorate. The bombs intended target was believed to be the police station; however only the Public Estate Corporation office was slightly damage. No causalities resulted from the attack. The Revolutionary Struggle is believed to be behind the attack. The group is specifically targeting the police.
On March 19, 2009 the police deactivated two car bombs without incident in the city of Pasto.  The authorities believe public institutions were the intended target for the attack.One car bomb was deactivated in the Villaflor neighborhood of Pasto.
Four civilians were killed and six others wounded when a suicide car bomb exploded at a shrine in the suburbs of Khost City.  Local officials stated that the target of the attack were civilians praying at the shrine in a gathering for the Afghan New Year.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
Haji Wazir, the mayor of the Zormat District of Pakita Province, was wounded when gunmen attacked his vehicle on the Gardez-Zormat Road, Paktia Province.  Local officials blamed the Taliban for the attack.
On March 23, 2009 FARC rebels shot two police officers and a nine-year old boy in Toribio municipality. The attack left one police officer dead and the other officer and boy injured. The FARC are believed to be responsible for the attack.
Nine police were killed when gunmen attacked a police checkpoint in the Greshk District of Helmand Province.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
Eight civilians were killed and six were wounded, including three police officers, when a suicide bomber detonated his explosives on the second floor of the district administration building in the Dand District of Kandahar Province.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
On March 30, 2009 a series of bomb were planted outside the offices on politicians in Thessaloniki.  The gas canister bombs caused damage to each office but no casualties resulted from any of the attacksOne attack occurred outside a conservative MP office.Anarchist groups have targeted politician's office in the past with similar devices.
Mullah Nur Mohammand, a religious scholar, was killed by unknown gunmen in the Soktakelai area of Cheghcheran, the capital of Ghowr Province.  No credit was claimed for the murder.
Ten people, including three police officers were killed when suicide-bombers attacked the provincial council headquarters in Kandahar City.  According to reports, a vehicle approached building, stopping near the entrance.  Several individuals wearing military uniforms got out of the vehicle.  The driver detonated the explosives inside the vehicle while the other attackers opened fire on the building.  Police killed at least two suicide-bombers, but at least one other successfully entered the building and detonated his explosives.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
Four civilians were wounded when a privately-owned water tanker struck a roadside mine in the Marawara District of Konar Province.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
One policeman was killed and two others were wounded when their vehicle was destroyed by a roadside bomb in the Lolaki area of Shenkay District, Zabol Province.  The vehicle was a supply vehicle assigned to police units in Shenkay.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
On April 9, 2009 four bombs were planted at churches in Athens and Thessaloniki. The bombs were all discovered after a caller warned authorities of there presence.  Each device was diffused without incident.One device was planted at the Aghia Triada Cathederal.The Conspiracy of Fire Cells of Thessaloniki- Athens claimed responsibility for the attack.
Syed Khan, the chief of Maqar District of Ghazni Province,  was wounded when militants attacked his vehicle as he traveled from his home to his office.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
Four police were wounded when militants attacked a police checkpoint in the Alchin Pol area of Kunduz Province.  The militants attacked police reinforcements sent to the area, destroying two police vehicles.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
One police was killed and another wounded by a mine explosion in the Kampeng area of Nehr-e Seraj District of Helmand Province.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
The police chief of Anjil District, Herat Province, Khuja Mohammad Hissah, escaped an attack on his vehicle by a remote-controlled bomb in the Pol-e Karta area of Anjil District.  Reports indicate that explosives placed in a hand card exploded when the chief's vehicle passed by.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
A suicide-bomber attacked the administrative building of Herat Province where the office of the governor and provincial councils were located.  The bomber was stopped by police as he entered a police checkpoint at the entrance to the building, where police shot him.  The bomber was able to detonate his explosives, but there were no reports of other casualties.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
One security guard was killed and three others wounded when their vehicle struck a roadside mine in Shinki District of Zabol Province.  The guards were employed by a road construction company.  Local officials blamed the Taliban for the attack.
Abdol Zaher, the chief of the public bus service of Kandahar Province, was killed by unknown gunmen on a motorcycle in the Shikarpur area of Kandahar City.  No credit was claimed for the murder.
One police was killed and two others wounded when their vehicle struck a roadside mine in the Khoji area of Khogiani District in Nangarhar Province.  Eyewitness reports contradicted press reports stating that the vehicle was destroyed by a rocket.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
Two police were wounded when a bomb attached to a bicycle exploded as their vehicle passed by in the Kabulshah area of Kandahar City.  No credit was claimed for the bombing.
A high school in the Nadir Shah Kot District of Khost Province was destroyed by explosives.  Reports indicate four bombs were placed inside of the school and detonated around midnight.  No  responsibility was claimed for the bombing, but local officials blamed the Taliban.
Twelve civilians were killed when their tractor was destroyed by a roadside bomb in the Shamanzi District of Zabol Province.  Local officials blamed the Taliban for the bombing.
Five police were killed and ten others wounded when suicide bombers attacked a police vehicle in the Greshk District of Helmand Province.  The incident involved two bombers.  The bombers detonated their explosives as a police convoy passed a bazaar.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
On  May 11, 2009 a coordinated attack was carried out in Athens against two facilities owned by the Public Power Corporation.  In both attacks molotov cocktails were thrown into the building causing moderate fire damage but no casualties.One attack took place in the northern suburbs of Athens.The Vengeance Nucleus, a previously unheard of group, claimed responsibility for the attack. A series of anarchist groups have formed in 2009 and operate under the Revolutionary Struggle banner.
Multiple suicide bombers attacked the Municipality building in Khost City, killing at least six policemen and wounding approximately 18 others.  The wounded were a mix of police and civilians.  Reports tended to indicate that the building was attacked by at least two suicide car bombs and other militants who entered the building on foot.  These attackers may have kidnapped or murdered employees at the building.  Police reported that at least three additional suicide bombers had been killed by police gunfire.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack and claimed the building was attacked by a dozen bombers.
Five police were killed and two others wounded when armed gunmen attacked a police checkpoint in the Khashrod District of Nimroz Province.  Local officials blamed the government's armed opposition, a term used to describe the Taliban.
Two police were killed and ten others wounded when a suicide car bomb exploded next to a police foot patrol in the Arghadab District of Kandahar Province.  Reports indicate the possibility that the district police chief of Arghadab District, identified as Zmaray, was the target of the attack.  No credit was claimed.
Two civilians and one policeman were wounded when a remote-controlled bomb in a push cart exploded near a police patrol in the Do Rahi area of Kandahar City.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack and stated nine police were killed.
A group of two or three armed men attacked a police checkpoint at Xonobod in the Andijan region of Uzbekistan. The attack was later claimed by the Islamic Jihad Union, believed to be a splinter of  the IMU (Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan).  A suicide bombing occurred in the same region on the same day.
One border policemen was killed when militants opened fire on a border police station on the Mazar-e Sharif Road in Balkh Province.  The gunmen attacked on motorcycles.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
Nine police were wounded when their vehicle struck a roadside mine in the Shindand District of Herat Province.  The police had been tasked to guarding a World Food Program distribution unit earlier in the day and were returning to base in the evening when the vehicle struck the mine.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack and stated three police were killed and two others wounded.
On May 29, 2009 a bomb exploded outside the Education Ministry in Quito.  The bomb caused no casualties.  The improvised explosive devise was made from household items.Fliers protesting President Rafael Correa administrations were found at the scene. This attack appears to be coordinated with another attack at the Teleamazonas building where a similar device exploded and the same anti-Correa fliers were found.
Eng Mohammad Omar, the governor of Kunduz Province, was wounded in a explosion along the Takhar-Konduz highway in the Khastapa area of Kunduz Province. The Governor's vehicle was destroyed by a remote-controlled mine.  No credit was claimed for the attack, which to date was a rare incident against high-ranking government officials in the northern part of Afghanistan.
On June 1, 2009, Abdulhakim Muhammad shot two United Soldiers outside an Army recruiting office in Little Rock, Arkansas. One of the soldiers died and  the other was wounded.Mr. Muhammad, an American citizen, is known to have ties to radical Islamic groups in Yemen.  Mr. Muhammad stated that he attacked the soldiers because 'he was mad at the US military because of what they had dome to Muslims in the past. Mr. Muhammad is currently in US custody.
Three civilians, including two children, were killed and three others wounded when a bomb exploded near the gate of a stone-crushing factory in the Helmand Province capital of Laskhargah.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
On June 4, 2009 a 15 kg  motorcycle bomb was diffused without incident in the downtown area of the San Vicente del Caguan Municipality.Authorities believe the FARC is responsible for planting the bomb.
The police chief of Sar Hawzah District of Paktika Province, identified only as Janan, was killed and the Sar Hawzah district chief was wounded when their vehicle struck a roadside mine in the Shoi Kamar area of Paktika Province.  Reports indicate the two chiefs were responding to security personnel under attack by militants.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
Two police were killed and two others wounded when militants attacked a police convoy in the Kodali area of Zanakhan District, Ghazni Province.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack and stated that ten police were killed.
Three police were killed and three others wounded when a remote-controlled VBIED destroyed their vehicle in the center of Kandahar City.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
Four civilians were killed and 14 others wounded when a bomb exploded in a crowded bazaar in the Greshk District of Helmand Province.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
On June 16, 2009 a bomb was diffused without incident outside the Juan XXIII school in the Algeciras Municipality.  The 10 kg device was comprised of ANFO (ammonium nitrate fuel oil), shrapnel and Pentolite.Authorities believe the FARC is responsible for planting the bomb. This bomb was coordinated with another failed attack at a nearby police station.
Mohammad Nazim Jamil, fuel director of Shir Khan Dry Port in Dasht-i Archi District, Ghazni Province, was killed by insurgents while traveling in the Korahi area. One of his personal guards was wounded.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
Five police were killed and two others wounded when their vehicle was destroyed by a roadside bomb in the Shurabak District of Kandahar Province.  No credit was claimed for the attack. Local officials blamed rebels, a common reference to the Taliban.
Two security guards were killed, eight wounded and seven missing when insurgents attacked a convoy of the US company United Stated Protection and Investigation (USPI) on the Kandahar-Laskhargah highway in Helmand Province.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
Abdol Khaleq, the chief of the criminal investigation unit of Taywara District, Ghowr Province, was killed when unknown gunmen broke into his house and killed him.  No credit was claimed in the murder.
Hajji Akbar Khan, a tribal elder of the Qarabagh District of Ghazni Province, was killed when his vehicle was destroyed by a roadside mine.  Two others elders were wounded in the explosion.  The elders were returning from talks concerning releasing inmates.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
Three staffers of a local NGO were killed when their vehicle was destroyed by a roadside bomb in the Bala Hesar area of Aqcha District of Jowzjan Province.  The three workers apparently were staffers of a local NGO that worked with the UN Agency for Refugees in the area.  The Taliban denied involvement in the bombing.
Three civilians were killed and two others wounded when an IED destroyed their vehicle in the Popalzai area of Greshk District, Helmand Province.  Local officials blamed the Taliban for the attack.
The deputy reconnaissance chief in the Konar Security Command, identified in reports as General Zarjan, was killed when his vehicle struck a mine in the Jaland area of Alingar District of Laghman Province.  One civilians was also killed and three others wounded.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
Three civilians were killed and four others wounded when a rocket destroyed a house in a residential section in the Nankalam area of Manogai District, Konar Province. No credit was claimed for the attack.
Seven workers of a road construction company were wounded when two roadside IEDs exploded on the Khost-Gardez highway in the Wazi Zadran District of Khost Province.  No credit was claimed in   the attack, but a second attack (reference Incident # 43147) occurred early in the next morning in the same area.
A suicide-bomber detonated his explosives in the Camp-e Sakhi area of Mazar-e Sharif.  The target of the attack was not identified.  No casualties were reported and no credit was claimed for the attack.
Two Afghans working for the Dutch Aid Agency, HealthNet TPO, were kidnapped by unknown gunmen in Khost Province.  HealthNet TPO specializes in rehabilitating healthcare systems in war zones and disaster areas.  No responsibility was claimed for the kidnapping.
One civilian was killed and two police and approximately 28 civilians were wounded when a militant threw a hand grenade at police officers in a market in Khost Province.  No responsibility was claimed for the attack.
On July 9, 2009 a coordinated attack was carried out against two police stations in Athens.  In the second attack a small explosive device was planted near the Holargos municipal police building in Athens. The device caused moderate damage but no casualties.Minutes earlier a similar device exploded under a police vehicle.Similar attacks have been perpetrated by anarchist groups in recent months.
A convoy of the Angar Organization was attacked by gunmen in the Chakawa area of Delaram District of Farah Province, killing two security guards and wounding three others.  The Angar Organization was identified as a company transferring logistics equipment for foreign forces in Afghanistan.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
Sayed Fazlollah Wahedi, the governor of Konar Province, escaped an assassination attempt when militants fired a missile at his vehicle as he returned from a construction project inauguration in the Shekar District of Konar Province.  No casualties were reported.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
On July 12 the Israeli army reported that Palestinian militants fired a rocket from the Gaza strip into southern Israel. The attack was not claimed, nor were there any damages or fatalities.
Rajab Khan, police chief of Jalriz District, Wardak Province, was killed along with three other police officers when their vehicle struck a roadside bomb in the Esmaelkhel area.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
Two civilians were killed and two others were wounded when a bomb attached to a bicycle exploded in front of a Provisional Reconstruction Team (PRT) office in Ghazni City.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
Two nephews of Malak Niaz, a tribal elder in the Spin Ghar District of Nangarhar Province, were killed when insurgents attacked Niaz's home.  Local officials blamed the Taliban for the attack and stated three were killed in the fighting.  Up to a dozen insurgents were captured, including 10 Pakistani nationals
Two workers of the Najib Gorboz Road Construction Company were killed when their truck struck a roadside bomb in the Nurkil area of Bak District, Khost Province.  The two casualties included a security guard.  No credit was claimed for the attack.
A coordinated attack by suicide bombers struck Gardez City, capital of Paktia Province, and Jalalabad, capital of Nangarhar Province.  In the first attack, at least six suicide bombers, some of them wearing burkas, attacked government building in Gardez.  One bomber detonated his explosives in front of the Intelligence Directorate building, killing three Intelligence Directorate personnel.  Two other suicide-bombers were able to detonate their explosives, killing two police officers.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.  For additional information, reference incident report # 43186.
One French national of a French relief organization was injured in a roadside bomb explosion in the Hazar Sim area of the Roy-i-Do Aab District, Samangan Province.  No credit was claimed for the attack and the name of the NGO was not identified in reports.
Five people were killed in a suicide bomb attack in the Chechen capital Grozny around 5pm in front of a concert hall. Amongst the dead, were three police officers, one civilian and the bomber. At least 10 people were wounded in the attack.
On July 27, 2009 a gas cannister bomb exploded outside the office of a member of the right wing LAOS party.  The blast damaged the exterior of the building but caused no casualties.Various anarchist groups operating under different names claimed responsibility for the attack. The Revolutionary Struggle is the umbrella group for many of these anarchist groups.
Two civilians were killed and four others wounded when the vehicle of Warsaj District police chief, Ghulam Mohammad, was struck by a roadside bomb.  Mohammad and his personnel escaped injury.  The Taliban claimed credit for the attack.
A bomb exploded outside of Afghan President Hamid Karzai presidential campaign office in the Gozara District of Herat Province.  No casualties were reported and no credit was claimed for the attack.
On July 30, 2009 two bombs targeted the Civil Guard in the Calvia municipality of Mallorca.  In the first attack a bomb placed under a police vehicle exploded killing the two officers inside. The attack came two days before the royal family was to visit the island. ETA claimed responsibility for the attack.
On August 3, 2009 two Molotov cocktails were thrown inside a police vehicle in Astakos. The vehicle was destroyed but no casualties resulted.  Similar attacks have been perpetrated by anarchist groups in recent months.
On August 9, 2009 a series of four bombs exploded in Palma de Majorca. The bombs targeted areas frequented by tourist but no casualties resulted and only minor damage resulted.One bomb exploded at the Enco restaurant; no casualties resulted.  ETA claimed responsibility for the attack in a telephone warning which alerted the authorities to the presence of the bombs.
On August 13, 2009 Jairo Martinez Solarte was assassinated in Cali.  Mr. Martinez Solarte was a prosecutor in Cali; he prosecuted members of the FARC.Authorities believe the FARC is responsible for the attack.
On August 21, 2009 a gas-cylinder bomb exploded  inside the new House of Justice in Santander de Quilichao. The 20 kg bomb was comprised of ANFO (ammonium nitrate fuel oil) and destroyed the building but caused no casualties. The FARC is believed to be responsible for the attack.
On August 27, 2009, a suicide bomber struck a group of tribal police, while they were making arrangements for fasting, in the Afghanistan-Pakistan border town of Torkham in the Khyber Agency. The blast killed 22 police officers and injured roughly a dozen. The next day, the Tehreek-e-Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack, saying it was their first revenge for their leader's - Baitullah Mehsud - death.
An IED with 40 kilos of TNT was set off by an unidentified suspect near a police traffic checkpoint in Makhachkala, Dagestan. The explosion killed one person and injured nine others.
On September 4, 2009, two radio station towers belonging to KRKO radio station were knocked over by a bulldozer in Snohomish County. A significant amount of damage was done to both towers.The Earth Liberation Front later claimed responsibility. In a statement the group said: AM radio waves cause adverse health effects including higher rates of cancer, harm to wildlife...When all legal channels of opposition have been exhausted, concerned citizens have to take action into their own hand to protect life and the planet.
On September 11, 2009 a pipe bomb was discovered outside a home in Londonderry.  The bomb was diffused without incident.  The house was targeted because the owner was the sister of a Catholic police officer.The Real IRA claimed responsibility for the attack and for another attack on the home of the officer's parents.
On September 17, 2009 FARC rebels destroyed  an electricity pylon in the rural area of La Cabuya in Norte de Santander Municipality. The attack temporarily left 350,000 people without electricity but caused no casualties. The authorities believe the FARC are responsible for the attack.
Police foiled an attack on NWFP Education Minister Sardar Hussain Babak in the town of Buner.The suspected teenage suicide bomber and two other militants were hiding in a middle school, but the police quickly rushed to the area. The militants opened fire on the police, with two escaping and the suicide bomber blowing himself up.
On September 23, 2009 a home-made bomb exploded outside the apartment of a former minister in the PASOK Party which is the main opposition party.  The bomb caused minor damage to the building but no casualties.Anarchist groups have targeted politicians in recent months but there are no claims of responsibility.
A series of coordinated attacks struck the Northwest Frontier Region of Pakistan on September 26, 2009. The second of three bombings occurred in the town of Bannu, by a suicide bomber, which killed six people. The suicide bomber struck a prison, which killed five police officers and one prisoner. While the police blame the Taliban for the attack, it is still not clear who the perpetrators are.
On October 3, 2009 a bomb placed in a trash bin exploded in downtown Athens.  The blast occurred prior to and in the vicinity of a campaign rally being held by the New Democracy Party.  The blast caused damage to nearby vehicles and buildings but no casualties.The Conspiracy of Fire Cells of Thessaloniki- Athens claimed responsibility for the attack.
On October 12, 2009 a Libyan man entered the Santa Barbara military baracks in Milan and detonated a homemade explosive device.  The blast intended to kill Italian soldiers exploded and wounded the bomber and a nearby soldier.In the subsequent investigation two other men, an Egyptian and a Libyan, were arrested. Authorities also discovere that the bomber had conducted to the typical 'Suicide Bomber's ritual prior to carrying out the attack.
This is the first of two attacks that occurred within a span of minutes in Islamabad, Pakistan. On October 20, 2009, twin suicide bombs exploded at Islamabad's International Islamic University, one of the largest Islamic universities in the world. The first explosion hit a male teaching faculty. A total of seven people were killed, including the two suicide bombers. Around 29 people were injured after the two attacks. It is unclear who was responsible for the attacks. The Pakistan military recently launched a massive anti-Taliban offensive in South Waziristan.
Sur Gol Khan, an officer of the Afghan Independent Election Commission, was killed by unidentified gunmen in the Jamjami village of Ghazni province.  Reports indicate that the victim also served as a teacher in outlying villages.  No credit was claimed for the murder.
(2nd of 5)A suicide bomber targeted the UNDP compound in Hargeysa in a series of five coordinated suicide attacks that targeted the Presidential palace, the UNDP compound, and the Ethiopian Consulate in Somalialand and two anti-terrorism centers in Puntland.The five suicide attacks, in total, killed twenty-eight people and wounded thirty-two others.  Media sources didn't disaggregate the death totals in the three Somaliland attacks, nor did they disaggregate the totals in Puntland.It's notable that both regions are breakaway states from the rest of Somalia and have enjoyed relative stability while the rest of the country has been embroiled in a raging insurgency.
On August 2, 2008, the car of a UC Santa Cruz researcher was fire bombed in their driveway. The ensuing fire forced the family to flee from the second floor of their home.  One person was injured  in the process.The researcher was not listed on the list of thirteen researchers who were threatened in a pamphlet found in a downtown coffee shop in Santa Cruz. The Animal Liberation Front later claimed credit for the attack.It is believed this attack was coordinated with another nearby attack on a professor's home.
On November 15, 2009 a bomb exploded in a home owned by an Italian. The blast caused no casualties but extensively damaged the home.The Corsican National Liberation Front (FLNC) has targeted mainland French and European interest in Corsica in the past.
On November 22, 2009 a 400lb car bomb partially detonated outside the headquarters of the Northern  Ireland Policing Board.  The bomb caused no damage or causalities as the explosives failed to detonate.Dissident Republican are believed to be behind the attack.
Two journalists were kidnapped by Taliban gunmen as they traveled the main Kabul-Kandahar highway in Ghazni Province.  The journalists were identified as Dawa Khan Menapal of Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty and Aziz Popal of a local Kandahar TV station.  The two journalists were released on November 30.
On November 30, 2009 a series of bomb exploded in Thessaloniki.  The bombs were all made of gas cartridges.  The bombs caused minimal damage but no causalities. One attack targeted a local hotel. Authorities suspect anarchist groups are behind the attack which comes on the heels of the trial of a prominent anarchist.
On December 1, 2009 FARC rebels detonated a bomb at a school in Cuaca. The blast destroyed the school but caused no casualties. A police station was also damaged by the blast.
On December 2, 2009 the husband of a teacher was assassinated in Neiva. The FARC has previously warned the teacher to leave town.
On December 8, 2009 a member of the FARC threw a grenade into a crowd of civilians in Guapi. The blast killed a mother and her child and injured sixteen other people
On December 15, 2009 a bomb exploded next to a police vehicle on the outskirts of Ibague. The blast killed two civilians and wounded one police officer.  The authorities believe the FARC are responsible for this attempted attack.
On December 21, 2009 FARC rebels kidnapped the Francisco Cuellar, the Governor of Caqueta, from his home in Florence.  The rebels killed one of the Governor's bodyguards and injured two others in the process of kidnapping the Governor. The Governor's whereabouts are unknown.
On December 30, 2009 a bomb was planted outside a home owned by a Paris-based businessman in Porto Vecchio, Corsica.  The explosives were packed into a beer barrel and were to be detonated with an incendiary device; however, the charge failed to detonate. The bomb was removed without incident.Attacks similar to this have been in past perpetrated by Corsican separatist groups who target mainland French interest on the island.
